<div id="fulltext" code="0" wordcount="42743">
v 
crl 
<pb>
For List of Books 
BY 
ALBION W. TOURG^E 
SEE END OV THIS BOOK 
<pb>
dfean Who 
©utliveb Ibimself 
ALBION W. TOURGEE 
Author of I fool's Errand By One of ihe Fools. 
NEW YORK FORDS HOWARD 
AND HULBERT 1898 
<pb>
COPYRIGHT IN 1898 
BY 
ALBION W. tourcfie. 
<pb>
i 

M 
CONTENTS 
PACK 
THE MAN WHO OUTLIVED HIMSELF ... 5 
POOR JOEL PIKE 93 
THE GRAVE OF TANTE ANGELIQUB ... 163 
v 
<pb>
fldan Wbo ©utlivefc feimse'f. 
INTRODUCTION. 
THE name of one of the victims of the 
holocaust at the Charity Fair in Paris recalled 
to my mind the fact that less than a year ago 
I received by express a package accompanied 
by this note my 
DEAR FRIEND : thirty odd years 
ago we were companions in misfortune in 
more than one of the overcrowded pens in 
which the Confederacy immured its prisoners 
of war. You will not recognise me for the 
name hereto affixed is not the one by which 
you knew me. If I were to use the name 
familiar to you I fear your curiosity perhaps 
your very incredulity might lead you to 
break the seal of the accompanying packet 
even despite my solemn injunction to leave 
the same intact. For the same reason I dare 
5 
<pb>
Cbe flban Wlbo ©utlix>efc t>imself. 
not more fully identify myself but will only 
say that for many months I slept within arm's 
length of you upon the crowded floor of Libby 
Prison and passed many days in guessing out 
with you the words of Don Quixote in the 
original Spanish from a volume which by 
some strange chance you brought with you 
when you came to share our quarters in the 
old Military Prison at Atlanta. 
There were six of us who undertook the 
study of the noble Castilian tongue under 
most peculiar conditions. ave were not very 
well equipped according to the notions of the 
schools having but three books if I remember 
rightly the immortal story of Cervantes 
a small Spanish french dictionary and a 
Spanish Testament with a vocabulary at 
tached. You generally held the text by rea 
son of your proprietorship of the books I 
suppose or perhaps because you had some 
advantage over the others in having gathered 
knowledge of the pronunciation from a pre 
vious brief companionship with one whose 
authority on the subject was unquestionable. 
When we were transferred to Libby 
where as you will recollect we arrived in the 
midst of a severe snowstorm five of us you 
<pb>
Cbe Ban lubo Outlives Ibimself. 7 
among the number were assigned to the same 
room. Bateman separated from us by reason 
of a difference in rank we never saw again. 
Of the remaining five you believe yourself to 
be the only one alive but I do not doubt 
that the facts I have stated will convince you 
that one more of this quintet of friends bound 
by such peculiar ties is still extant. Which 
one it is must remain a mystery until he also 
has passed beyond the bourn from which no 
traveller returns. 
The accompanying sealed package con 
tains a true account of a life strangely event 
full in its experiences. I am just sailing for a 
vacation which I expect will last for some 
years. During that time I hope to visit the 
scenes of the life of that Knight of La Mancha 
whose adventures we first traced together. I 
shall think of you often and may communl 
cate with you from time to time. It is because 
of the facts I have related that I intrust the 
secret of my life to you. I know it will be 
faithfully preserved. 
Should I return I shall ask to have this 
package remitted to me with its seals unbroken. 
Should I not be so fortunate you will 
open it and make such disposition of its con 
<pb>
8 Cbe /aban Mbo ©utlivefc f>imself. 
tents as you may see fit. Life is always 
uncertain mine perhaps peculiarly so though 
I hope the cloud which has so long hung over 
it may be lifted and that we may again meet 
to talk over days when life was so much more 
than mere existence to us who were part and 
parcel of its mighty movements. 
With the warmest wishes for your con 
tinued happiness and success I am 
Your old friend 
A. QUITMAN. 
I often wondered which of the little group 
of brave men it might be whose life secret 
was hidden by the seals of this baffling brown 
paper parcel. As it happened the fate of 
three out of the four who were accounted 
dead was wrapped in mystery. Two of them 
had disappeared during the conflict another 
some years afterward. Only one was incontestably 
dead. None of them bore a name at 
all resembling the one attached to this letter 
and I had never known a oerson of this name 
in my life. 
What recalled it to my mind lately was 
<pb>
Cbe Ran ullto @utliveo Dimself. 
seeing the name Arthur Quitman among 
the victims of that terrible calamity. Was it 
my friend? I had heard from him once or 
twice and knew he had expected to be in 
Paris about this time. Cabling an inquiry I 
received this answer 
A. Quitman American traveller wife and 
daughter missing. 
I determined to open the package. In 
giving its contents to the world I have thought 
best to preserve the secret of my prison 
friend's identity thus strangely committed to 
my care although giving him another name 
besides the one with which he transmitted to 
me the strange story that follows. 
<pb>
CHAPTER I. 
I USED often to wonder how Lazarus felt 
after he came forth. Now I know with this 
difference his entombment was for days 
only mine extended over years. It is twelve 
years since I died. It was the dog days 
then it is the dog days now. 
I was living in a suburban town my business 
being in the city of New York. I was 
not altogether unknown upon its streets nor 
in the capital of the Nation one of whose 
defenders I had been in a memorable struggle 
not of any personal prominence myself 
in this struggle I was brought by this accident 
of my life to the knowledge of some 
who were. My occupation well that had 
been of a character to considerably extend 
the knowledge of my personality making me 
one of those known to many people who are 
quite unknown to him. 
My home life was happy I had a wife and 
child and lived in a snug little house with a 
rapidly disappearing mortgage. 
10 
<pb>
Ran tolbo ©utlivefc Ibiinself. 
This house my wife and I bad planned to 
enlarge into a mansion as soon as the shadow 
of the encumbrance disappeared. The specifications 
were already drawn and had been 
submitted to the approval of our friends. 
How many happy hours had we not spent to 
gether conning over the designs and suggest 
ing amendments to add to its comfort and 
elegance it was situated in the inevitable 
track of an almost apparent boom and 
was flanked by quite a number of lots that I 
had bought as acreage and to which I 
looked with confidence for the fortune every 
good American believes to be lying in wait 
for him somewhere along the path of life. 
My situation was a good one and I pieced 
out my income now and then with more or 
less successful efforts of a literary character. 
I had some political prominence too and 
was not without hope of preferment at the 
hands of my party. 
I had latterly taken some chances in Wall 
Street not very large ones but large enough 
if they fulfilled expectations to have materially 
improved my financial condition. They 
did not seem likely to do so however. I 
suppose there was no good reason why I 
<pb>
Cbe Ran ttclbo ©utliveo timself. 
should have expected them to do so-so I 
put up my margins like a little man and 
as the chances of profit apparently grew more 
and more attenuated I became more and 
more determined to hang on to the bitter end. 
I suppose this is an almost universal ten 
dency. At least I once heard a great stu 
dent of human nature a gambler of national 
fame whom my resurrection came just too 
late to allow me to meet in the flesh again 
say that the chief reason why a well managed 
gambling house is almost sure to be a profit 
able business even with a perfectly honest 
game was in the fact that the common run 
of men will keep on playing so long as they 
continue to lose in the hope of retrieving 
their luck but after winning a few times 
will quit from fear that luck will turn against 
them again. 
I have often thought of this since my de 
mise and decided that I was just one of the 
common run of men who did not know 
when to stop. In fact I have about con 
eluded that the chief element of success in 
the world is not genius nor cleverness nor 
intellectual capacity of any sort but simply 
an intuitive faculty of determining just thq 
<pb>
ttbe flban toubo ©utliveo Ibimself. 13 
right time to let go. Doggedness is a com 
mon enough virtue if it be a virtue but the 
ability to know when to stop is a divine gift. 
The final perseverance of the saints may 
be a good theological dogma but I have 
noticed that most of those who practice it as 
regards earthly affairs at least die poor. 
Well I kept putting up my margins. One 
lot after another disappeared under the grow 
ing cloud of encumbrance until finally an 
other mortgage was put upon the home. 
And still the load became heavier and heavier 
until I began to hear my wife's re 
proaches and see my child's tears. That is 
I dreamed I heard reproaches for as a fact 
the wife I so dearly loved knew not a word 
about what I had done. I only fancied what 
would happen when she should know. It was 
before my mind's eye all the time how she 
would despise and contemn who had so 
loved and trusted when she should learn 
how I had trifled with her happiness and dis 
sipated the inheritance of our child. 
I believe now that if I had given up and 
confessed my weakness and shame my wife 
would have forgiven me even though it left 
us to begin life anew at the zero point of the 
<pb>
14 ttbe man Who ©utlivefc fjlmself. 
social and financial scale. Perhaps I thought 
so then but the belief only added to my des 
peration. How could I live to sue to her for 
pardon had she not trusted me from the 
first moment our eyes met when we were yet 
hardly more than children could I bear to 
blight that faith and disappoint that buoyant 
love we are told that love casteth out 
fear but mine multiplied it a thousandfold. 
I thought I would rather die than have her 
know my weakness. In fact I often contemplated 
suicide and that no doubt would have 
been the end of the struggle but I remembered 
a life insurance policy that stood in 
her blessed name which would have been in 
validated by such an act. It was all that 
would be left if if I could not hold on. So 
I did not raise my hand against my life but 
only prayed that I might die. 
And still the stock fell and continued to 
fall. Fraction by fraction point by point it 
crept down the scale of value. I haunted 
the brokers offices and read the white rib 
bons that rolled off the tickers until I was 
afraid to look at them any more. And still 
the calls for more margins came. 
A friend loaned me something on the 
<pb>
ttbe abn ticlbo ©utllveft fmmself. 15 
books I had gathered in the hope which a 
man of literary tendencies is so apt to in 
dulge of forming a really valuable collection 
a collection that shall be at the same time 
of use while he shall live and a sort of monument 
of scholarly aspiration when he shall 
be no more. They were my pride but not 
worth half the sum he advanced on them. I 
think now he did it out of mere pity for my 
despair. When a man has been dead awhile 
he finds the world improves wonderfully as 
he looks back upon it. 
I knew the end must come soon and tried 
to brace myself to bear the shock of humilia 
tion which it must bring. I was fully aware 
of what it meant. There is no crime the 
world will not forgive sooner than failure 
there is no other disgrace it will not forget 
except poverty. Pay that thou owest is in 
these days the holiest of all commandments. 
Whoever is unable to comply with it is al 
ready damned. Society the church the 
club his party and his friends stand ready 
to treat him as an outcast. His family are 
dragged with him to an obscurity in comparison 
with which Erebus is but twilight. 
I very well understood that if my little 
<pb>
16 abe flban Mbo ©utlivefc timself. 
property modest as it was were swept away 
and I went forth among men with the brand 
of the debtor on my brow it would be a 
thousand times worse than the mark of Cain 
whom all men contemned but whom none 
would slay lest they should end his agony 
inasmuch as mammon's condemnation is 
infinitely more potent with good society than 
god's. I kn ew that when the end came it 
would mean death. 
So I walked the office floor by day and the 
streets by night waiting for the end wonder 
ing when the blow would fall and how it 
would seem to meet annihilation. I think I 
must have walked a thousand miles in these 
last few days of culminating horror. How 
my head ached and my back! An old 
wound a relic of the battle days broke out 
afresh. How I prayed that it might bring 
the end still 
as I walked the pavements and the 
walls were covered with figures the queei 
indented figures of the ticker. The white 
endless coils stretched like writhing serpents 
over everything my gaze rested upon. I 
watched men's lips as I walked and saw what 
I could not hear from the buzzing in my ears 
<pb>
ttbe flran tkflbo ©utlivefc t>imself. 17 
the story of the continued decline of the 
great C.C.C. the seas incarnadine I called 
them and laughed at the silly pun which kept 
repeating itself in my poor brain. 
I have often wondered that I did not take 
to drink in those hours of nameless agony. 
Perhaps it would have been better if I had 
done so. I have learned since that is I have 
learned or read no matter one does not 
know how thoughts come when he is dead 
that in those institutions where the mentally 
infirm are hidden away and sometimes healed 
when they can in no other way stop the poor 
weak brain from circling round and round in 
search of what it can never find they appeal 
to Bacchus to give it rest and drown its cares 
in wine which brings respite in sleep. Per 
haps no it is better that I died. Intoxication 
may lull but the waking brings the agony 
again. Only death could have brought relief 
and death is better than life without honour or 
hope. 
The end came after many ages. There was 
a last call for margins the last for me at 
least. I do not know how I met it. I must 
have raised the money somehow for I had 
$27.13 left. I remember just how the money 
<pb>
tkubo ©utliveo t>imself. 
looked as I counted it out upon my desk a 
ten dollar bill two fives two twos three ones a 
dime and a three cent piece. I knew it was 
the end and had already given up all hope 
but somehow I was glad to have raised the 
margin. Nobody should ever call me a coward. 
I had staked everything home love honour. 
I do not know just what I did but I am sure 
it was something not well not exactly 
straight. 
When it was over I filed the receipt along 
with the others which told the story of the 
struggle locked my office door and started 
to go whither I do not know not to my 
home that is certain not at least until I had 
atoned for my fault I had always a fancy 
for the new Northwest the territory named 
after the father of our country and I have a 
notion that it was my purpose to go and bury 
myself in its dim umbrageousness until I 
might redeem my error and win a new home. 
How I expected to get there with the 
meagre sum at my disposal I do not know 
but I recall the fact that weeks before I had 
conceived the plan of shipping before the 
mast on a vessel bound to one of the ports 
of the new country and had learned at what 
<pb>
Aan tbjlbo ©utliveo timself. 19 
point and about what time such shipment 
could be made. 
This mode of escape commended itself to 
me the more readily because I was not only 
of athletic build but had that excess of vital 
ity which makes a sailor's life agreeable. Be 
sides that I had some knowledge of its duties 
and requirements. As a boy I had sailed 
the Great Lakes and as a young man had 
spent a summer as one of the crew of a fish 
ing smack on the Newfoundland Banks. So 
I had naturally thought of that seclusion 
which is a little less than impenetrable ob 
livion that rests upon a foremast hand who 
ships for a long cruise. I knew that long 
before one of the four masted schooners 
which now and then still make the trip 
around the Horn to our western coast could 
reach San Francisco the misfortunes of 
Philip Devens would have ceased to be of 
serious moment to any one except tha faith 
full wife who would wait for years in unfalter 
ing hope of the redemption of his promise 
the promise he would leave with her as the 
staff of her faith which yet would need no 
staff. 
It may be that I had started for the docks 
<pb>
fban Mbo ©utliveo hmmself. 
of the company which were well up town 
or I may have been going to the ferry intend 
ing to take one more look at the home I 
loved and perhaps get one more look of her 
whose trust I had wronged. I know not what 
may have been my purpose or destination 
save that I had fully determined never to 
return to the office I had left. 
This determination was of little moment 
because just there in the corner of the square 
visible from the windows of a noted hostel 
that happened which blotted out both past 
and future. My head seemed bursting. The 
sunshine was full of red clots. The very 
motions of the leaf shadows on the wall 
brought a new agony. I walked with my 
head bent down my mind full of one thought 
seeing but one thing the figures of the 
ticker which heralded to all the world my 
fate. There was a fearful pain in the back 
of my head where a burden like the weight 
of all the world seemed resting on the nape. 
My limbs dragged heavily my ears buzzed 
as if the blood beat in surges against the 
throbbing membranes. I remembered some 
thing like it in the old war days when I had 
dropped out of the line of march staggered 
<pb>
/Bban Mbo ©utllveo hmmself. 21 
to the roadside and fallen into unconscious 
ness from sunstroke. But this was not sun 
stroke. The air was cool. It was the dog 
days and the earth sweet from a recent 
shower. 
All at once while I was looking at the 
familiar scenes I died the pain was gone 
the burden the shame the fear the past. 
The home the wife the world all all were 
blotted out. 
I lifted my head and laughed. How bright 
the world was how cheery all things 
seemed! A cabman standing beside his 
horse laughed because I did I suppose. I 
looked at him laughed again sprang into his 
vehicle and told him to drive somewhere I 
do not remember where. 
All right Major he said slammed to 
the door and leapt upon his box. He was 
the last man who saw me in the city. He had 
hardly crossed the street among the crowd of 
vehicles when I opened the door jumped out 
and ran another way. A great fear had taken 
hold upon me. Some one was pursuing I 
thought. I did not know why but felt that 
I must escape. 
<pb>
I DO not know how far I went but finally I 
entered a store and bought some clothes 
plainer and cheaper than I had been wont to 
wear also a black valise. Then I went to a 
hotel. When I came to register I could not 
remember my name. I looked at an ad 
vertisement that hung in the office and wrote 
the first name I read upon it. The clerk 
smiled. I was alarmed that he did so and 
looked behind me to see who was pursuing 
and wondered that I saw no one. 
Entering the barber shop I had my beard 
cut off. It had grown undipped for years. 
I was proud of it and knew it was my most 
distinctive feature. When it had been re 
moved I went to my room and donned the 
clothes I had bought. I meant to have 
stayed until night but was afraid I did not 
know of what. So I cut off my moustache 
with a pair of scissors and stole out having 
in the valise the clothes I had worn. I felt 
strangely weak yet did not dare stop and 
22 
<pb>
Cbe fliban tclbo Ouilirca f>lmself. 
rest but pressed on and on clinging to the 
valise until I could go no farther. Then I 
sat down on the steps of a house to rest and 
think or try to think to remember. 
Everything seemed strange vague and 
confused. I could not remember who I was. 
I had an uncertain feeling that something 
was wrong what I could not tell. I was 
afraid of every one I saw. I could not make 
out where I was or where I wished to go. 
My only thought was that I was pursued 
and must flee. Why I did not know nor 
whither. 
This feeling would not let me rest. When 
I started on again I could walk only with 
difficulty. One leg seemed to drag and I 
had a feeling of having lost something but 
could not think what it was. Now I know it 
must have been my valise. I hunted for it I 
am told for years never knowing what I 
sought only that it was something I had lost. 
This is all I can remember all I can re 
call after the moment when I lost myself. 
From that time all was blank. I seem to 
have walked for years and years always with 
difficulty always anxious to rest but afraid 
to stop. That was all. I think I must have 
<pb>
«4 ttbe ban 'litibo Outiivea tbimself. 
fallen somewhere and suffered some injury 
perhaps of the spine but I do not know. I 
was dead and long before the resurrection 
came all traces of contusion if there were 
one had passed away. 
What happened while I was dead I do not 
know except as I have learned from others 
or inferred from what I came to know after 
wards. I judge that I must have been in 
fairly good physical condition during this 
interval save for a general weakness and 
lethargy with a dullness and dragging of one 
side. I am told that I slept a great part of 
the time. 
Impressions seem to have faded as fast as 
made. I seem to have known what was 
going on about me but to have had no mem 
ory of anything in the past near or remote. 
There is said to have been a marked quiet 
ness and decorum in my manner. I am told 
that I retained a knowledge of certain things 
it might be expected that one would lose 
under such conditions. It is said for in 
stance that I could read pronouncing the 
words with some difficulty but correctly 
though I showed little comprehension of their 
<pb>
ttbe flban ttclbo ©utlivefc fjimself. 25 
meaning. So too I could speak answering 
questions with an apparent comprehension of 
the fact that they were questions but without 
any clear conception of the words I uttered 
in reply. I am informed that I learned no 
new words or names during this time but 
persisted in calling all people by names that 
had evidently belonged to others I had 
known before my death using only given 
names however or surnames without distinguishing 
forenames. Even the dogs and 
horses I saw of which I was very fond 
I would not call by their proper names. 
Though I might repeat them over and over 
again I seem to have had no power of asso 
ciating them with the particular animals to 
which they belonged. 
In short while my brain was s^pparently 
susceptible to impressions it appeared to lack 
the capacity to hold or recall them. I am 
told that there was but one name or rather 
but one word which seemed to awaken some 
latent thrill of recollection some echo of a 
past which struggled vainly for utterance and 
recognition. This word was Wife. When 
ever I was asked if I had a wife it is recorded 
that I became always deeply moved and kept 
<pb>
z 6 Cbe Ran Wbo ©utliveo immself. 
repeating both awake and asleep for several 
days thereafter in most pleading and supplicating 
tones Wife wife as if calling for 
some lost presence. At the same time while 
wide awake it is said that I made continued 
search as for something lost from which it 
was inferred that the lost something I was so 
often seeking was my wife whose death or 
disappearance might have been the cause of 
my mental disturbance. 
This no doubt may have helped to divert 
inquiry into wrong channels and may have 
saved her whose love was sufficient even to 
pierce the darkness that hung over my im 
prisoned conscience the sorrow that would 
have attended knowledge of the truth. 
I can never be grateful enough that the 
slumbering sense while not wholly dead to 
sweetest of all endearing terms was yet im 
pervious to all else so that she whom I loved 
even in death was never called upon to look 
upon the face from which the soul light had 
departed or hear the agonising cry of a struggling 
consciousness which could not have 
comprehended her tenderest most tearful 
and reiterated response. That sorrow at 
least was spared the gentle one whom from 
<pb>
Cbe iran Wbo ©utlivefc Tbimselt 27 
the hour of our marriage I had rarely ad 
dressed by any other name than Wife. 
We had lived very close to each other 
too close perhaps for I had told her all my 
hopes all my plans for the morrows of which 
we were to be ever young joint tenants 
everything that had been or was hoped for 
in my life until the accursed temptation of 
the c c C got hold upon me. I thought to 
make that a joyful surprise instead of the 
woeful dark awakening of unutterable terror 
that fell upon her when the end came. 
Thank God she never saw the horrid 
death in life which uttered the name with 
which love had cloistered her but could 
have made no response to her most impassioned 
appeal. That much at least her un 
certain lingering widowhood was spared. 
When hope at length was dead she did not 
know the nameless horror of the death which 
had swallowed up the life she loved. 
My case is said to have been so peculiar in 
its manifestations as to have attracted the 
attention of the most distinguished experts. 
I have read a monogram prepared by one of 
the most eminent of these from which I de 
rived the major part of what I know about 
<pb>
28 Cbe /iban tolbo ©utux>ca 
myself during this period that I always think 
upon as death. I suppose that term is some 
what too strong that it was in fact only a 
period of suspended intelligence. 
Sensation remained in some respects very 
acute. I complained all the time I am told 
that my legs and feet were full of pins and 
needles. In the old days I should probably 
have been accounted a victim of witchcraft. 
My friend the expert to whom I have re 
ferred concluded there had been some spinal 
contusion producing cerebral disturbance 
and made many examinations with a view of 
determining the truth of his theory. Judging 
from the scarifications that still remain he 
must have made some rather severe experiments 
too. Indeed he admits as much in 
his monograph. No matter however deeply 
he may have carved my flesh his instruments 
left no trace on my memory. He says my 
sufferings from his experimentation were ap 
parently very acute but as soon as the cause 
was removed I forgot them. 
Some of the things he records seem like 
acts of almost inconceivable torture such as 
burning with hot irons but I have no mem 
ory of them now. Why could not some such 
<pb>
Gibe /Dban wlbo ©utliveo Iblmself. 29 
anaesthetic condition supervene life's woes 
without complete annihilation of self he 
had a notion that consciousness might be 
awakened by fierce appeals to slumbering 
sense. 
It is not a very enlightened view consider 
ing the period of the world's life at which it 
is put forth but he is not the only scientist 
of our time who has recommended torture as 
a cure for aberration. He who claims to be 
the greatest living alienist subscribes to even 
a more barbarous creed. Thank God there 
are not many such as he though little more 
than half a century ago the belief was all but 
universal and the victims of mental disease 
were still whipped through the streets of 
English towns at the cart's tail to heal their 
malady. Even he who practised on my un 
conscious frame but half believed in its efficacy 
and linked his theory of nervous shock 
with a sounder faith in stimulated absorptive 
theory. At all events his treatment barba 
rous as it seems wrought no ill and may 
have been not without beneficent results. 
<pb>
THE resurrection was a slow affair with 
out any of the startling features I had pre 
viously imagined to be inseparable from such 
transmutation. One morning I noticed when 
I awoke that there were several other persons 
sleeping on small iron beds in the same room 
with me. I sat up and looked at them wonderingly. 
I am told that I had seen the same 
thing every day for seven years but it had 
never occurred to me to wonder at it before 
then. 
My curiosity was of a very weak and transitory 
character even now. I looked at my 
fellow lodgers a moment and then lay back 
upon my pallet and forgot them not in 
dreams or fancies but in sheer vacuity. By 
and by I noticed that some one entered our 
room the door of which had a little wicket 
in it which one could easily slide back on the 
outside and see what was going on within 
without taking the trouble to open the door 
which was a large strong one. It was a very 
30 
<pb>
ttbe Man Wlbo ©utlivefc f>imself. 31 
convenient arrangement when one of ihe 
lodgers was inclined to be sleepless which 
sometimes happens where there are several 
inmates. When the man entered he brought 
us our clothes and helped us to put them on. 
Some were very slow and awkward but he 
did not get impatient. 
When all were clothed he took us to a 
washroom and assisted us in making ourselves 
tidy. It occurred to me then or it may have 
been at some future time that he was very 
kind. When we had washed and combed 
and brushed our hair he took us to the diningroom. 
It was a very large one and there 
were quite a number of people at the table. 
Some of them were talking and some were 
silent. It occurred to me at some time that 
there was something incongruous in their 
characters but I do not suppose it was on 
this day nor the next indeed I have reason 
to believe that it was several months after 
wards. 
It seems as if I noticed about this time 
also that I was using a crutch and a cane. 
Somehow I could not understand why I 
should do so. There seemed to be no reason 
why I should not walk as others did. I 
<pb>
32 Cbe flban tolbo ©utlivefc fjimself. 
suppose there was none except that certain 
nerves had long refused to obey orders or 
rather had not received any orders. I no 
ticed many other things as time went on 
some seemed familiar and some did not. 
After awhile a very pleasant gentleman 
came and talked with me a number of times. 
After one of these visits I was assigned to 
another room. I was very glad of this for 
my companions had somehow grown rather 
tiresome. No one occupied this room with 
me. It was small but very neat and had a 
window which overlooked a beautiful ver 
dant country with a river showing among 
the trees and beyond it sloping hills that 
rose one above the other with tidy farms 
and houses in whose windows twinkled bright 
lights at nighttime. My new friend continued 
his visits to me here. He was a fine large 
man with tawny beard a wide brow pleasant 
eyes and a very soft voice with agreeable 
modulations. I grew very fond of him. 
There were several books in the room 
lying carelessly about. There seemed some 
thing familiar about them and I enjoyed 
them more and more as I read them over and 
over or rather here and there as they chanced 
<pb>
flftan Mbo ©utliveo Tbimaelf. 33 
to open when I took them up. My friend 
came now very often and nearly always 
brought a new book. Sometimes he would 
talk with me about those I had read. I have 
been allowed to see the record of his visits 
and find they extended over a period of two 
years though I cannot make it seem so long. 
The truth is that I did not fully awake that 
first morning when I sat up and rubbed my 
eyes but only began to awake. 
One day this friend brought me a book 
that I read with great delight. It was the 
story of a man who lived alone upon an 
island. His name was Robinson Crusoe and 
from the first it seemed familiar. But it was 
not until I came to his man Friday that I 
recognised him as an old friend. Then a 
mist seemed to roll away and I saw a boy 
reading this same book sitting in an open 
glade of a wood with a dog lying beside him. 
I knew that the boy was myself and the dog's 
name was Rover. 
Then I looked at the other books in the 
room and at the names of their authors and 
knew them also. I began to recall their 
contents too and was delighted to find how 
familiar they were to me though I could not 
<pb>
34 ttbe man Mbo ©utlivea 1b(mself 
remember when I had read them and did 
not somehow realise that I had ever forgotten 
them. When my friend came the next day 
he seemed greatly delighted at what I had 
told him and said gleefully rubbing his 
large soft hands together 
We shall get on now we shall get on. 
After a time he turned to me quickly and 
asked what 
is your name his 
question took me by surprise and I 
could not answer. 
My name my name i stammered 
and for my life could say nothing more. It 
occurred to me that I had a name and I 
would willingly have told him what it was if 
I could have remembered it. But I could 
not so I only repeated wearily and con 
fusedly my 
name my name yes 
sir said my friend angrily rising 
from his chair and looking down upon me. 
He was a tall man and very large as I have 
said. He seemed almost to fill the room 
now in his anger. 
Yes sir your name he repeated. You 
seem to be a gentleman so I suppose you 
<pb>
Cbe /iban Mho ©utiivcf c Dimaelf. 35 
have a name. Here you have been a guest 
in my house for a long time and I have come 
to see you every day but you have never told 
me your name. It is time we had an intro 
duction. My name is Walcott Dr. William 
Walcott and I would be much pleased if you 
would tell me yours. 
I felt the force of his remark and was 
greatly annoyed that I should have been guilty 
of such a grave discourtesy as he had charged. 
So his name was Walcott. It seemed curious 
that I had not learned the fact before we had 
been friends so long. Every one had a name 
of course Robinson Crusoe Shakspere Scott 
his name I recalled was Sir Walter though I 
had not thought of it before and and Oh 
a perfect flood of names rushed on my con 
sciousness at once. They seemed to be 
marching through my memory in columns and 
platoons some with familiar faces and some 
on printed pages. They came trooping from 
every corner of my brain until I wondered 
where they had been hidden away and why 
they had been hidden at all. 
But which of them was mine or had any of 
them been used to distinguish my personality who 
was I i was sure I had been somebody 
<pb>
36 Cbe ffban tklbo ©utliveo Ibimself. 
and ought still to be somebody but who who 
who was I i 
could not tell. There was a little mirror 
hanging against the wall of the room at the 
other end. I got up went over and glared at 
my reflection in it. Whose was the face I 
saw? What name had that visage ever born there 
seemed something familiar about it 
something which almost brought back a past 
I had known and ought to be able to recall 
but could not. I turned to my friend and said i 
cannot tell you. 
You mean you will not he returned 
severely. I shook my head. 
I shall not stand this trifling any longer 
he said. If you will not tell me your name 
I cannot as a gentleman hold any further 
intercourse with you. When you are ready 
to give me your confidence I shall be glad to 
visit you again. Until then I must decline to 
consider myself your friend. good evening 
sir. 
He went out and shut the door behind 
him. The bolt was on the outside or I would 
have opened it and called him back to explain 
to him how deeply I regretted my inability to 
comply with his request. 
<pb>
Cbe /Bban Mbo ©utlivefc f>imself. 37 
I was grieved to lose my friend and when 
I thought about it began to wonder why he 
was my friend if he did not know my name. 
Then I wondered why I had no other friends. 
There were several whom I knew about the 
building recalling the names of some and 
what were evidently nicknames of others. 
These had been accustomed to call me Num 
ber ninety-six. I knew now it was not my 
name though I had answered to it as if it had 
been. After my friend went away in such a 
huff I was greatly grieved but gradually took 
to wondering about things that had never 
before attracted my attention. I began to 
ask myself not only who I was but where I 
was and why I was there. 
It made me tired to think so I laid myself 
upon the bed and dozed through the long 
summer afternoon. It was night when I 
awoke and looked out upon the moonlit night. 
The questions started by my friend's inquiry 
multiplied. I asked myself not only who I 
was but what I had been. What relations 
had I father mother wife children what 
might the void contain should I ever find 
my way to the light suddenly the cold 
sweat of an unendurable agony burst out upon 
<pb>
38 ttbe flban trubo ©utliveo f>imself. 
my brow as I looked down at the shadow cast 
upon the greensward below me by the building 
I was in. It answered to my struggling thought 
questions I had asked. I had heard it spoken 
of as the institution but the word had 
meant nothing to my clouded mind. 
Now I knew it was a well-known asylum 
for the insane. I had seen it often in that 
life I could not yet recall and now recognised 
in the shadow below its turreted outline. And 
my friend Dr. Walcott he was the Super 
intendent. 
I think I must have fainted when I realised 
the horror of my situation and unconscious 
ness must have faded into sleep for when I 
awoke the dawn was just showing above the 
eastern hills. The resurrection was complete i 
woke not merely to consciousness but to 
knowledge knowledge of who and what I had 
been who and what I was. All my life up 
to the hour of my death stood out clear and 
sharp in my memory. Wife child home the 
position I had imperilled by my foolish venture 
in the c c c I remembered them 
all. 
The old burdens rolled back upon me with 
their pristine horror. I felt my brain reel 
<pb>
Cbe flban trubo ©utlivefc Ibimself. 39 
and wondered if reason would again be shaken 
from her throne. 
Stop what is this new question which 
comes surging across the tumult in my yet 
quivering brain who what where all 
these I had answered. There was still another 
When how should that be solved i 
looked at my face in the little glass upon 
the wall. A long dark beard with scarce a 
trace of grey head bare upon the crown the 
hair about the sides brown and curling. It 
was not the face I had known. It told of 
time elapsed since I had died. How long months 
or years in 
his excitement the day before my 
friend the Doctor had dropped a paper on 
the floor. It had rolled under the cot and 
he had forgotten it. I picked it up and 
looked at the date. It was ten years after the 
day of my death i 
was alone all that day overwhelmed with 
a surging tide of questions as to what had 
happened while I was numbered with the 
dead. 
It is a wonder that I did not return into 
the tomb from which I had just emerged. I 
did riot think much about the world and the 
<pb>
40 Cbe flban tkilbo ©utliveo hmmself. 
changes that might have occurred in it but 
of my wife my child. The former must be 
growing old. I remembered that she would 
be almost fifty being but two years younger 
than myself. What were her circumstances had 
she suffered from loss of my aid in the 
battle of life and 
our child she must now be a young 
lady of let me see she was twelve she must 
now be twenty-two. I wondered what she was 
like. Were they still alive or had they died of 
want through my weak and foolish venture all 
at once I thought of the insurance 
upon my life. It was evident that she must 
have believed me dead since my friend the 
Doctor did not know my name. If so she 
had probably collected the insurance. Why 
not every one must long ago have given 
me up for dead. So they could hardly have 
suffered want. How my heart leapt with 
joy at the thought but 
suppose I should reappear disclose 
myself be known to be alive i gasped for 
breath as I thought she might be stripped 
of comforts because the dead was alive. 
Should I whom she had mourned and no 
doubt half forgotten come forth from the 
<pb>
ttbe flban Ollbo ©utlivefc frfmself. 4' 
tomb and drag her down again to poverty 
and shame? I knew it would mean shame 
distress and social ruin. Society the world 
never forgets that an intellect has been 
shaken that a brain has lost its equilibrium. 
She might have married again. Why not the 
thought was agony but all the same I 
was bound to shield her from further suffer 
ing. Before the sun set I had decided upon 
my course I had been dead for a decade 
and dead I would remain. 
When the night came on I disrobed con 
scious of my past and present and kneeling 
by the little iron cot prayed for strength to 
sustain me in my fixed resolve never to break 
forth from the tomb in which I had been so 
long immured. Then I lay down to sweet 
and peaceful slumber only waking now and 
then to rejoice in the fact that I knew myself 
who I had been and what I was. 
<pb>
THE next morning when my friend the 
Doctor came he found me reading the 
Bible. It is strange what an attraction the 
book had for me. I had not been a specially 
religious man but somehow its pages seemed 
now redolent with the most precious memo 
ries. Father mother wife home friends 
all swept through my mind in their sweetest 
dearest aspects as I read the sacred pages. 
The tears were coursing down my cheeks as 
he opened the door quickly and entered. 
I have no doubt he had been watching me 
through the wicket for some time though I 
had not been conscious of the fact. I had 
evidently been an object of suspicion for a 
long while. That was why I had been re 
moved to this room. They suspected I had 
been restored to mental health and was now 
shamming insanity. He looked at me sharply 
for a moment and then said in a kind and 
sympathetic tone : 
<pb>
Cbe ffoan Tffilbo ©utlivefc hmmself. 43 
You have come to yourself i did not 
answer. 
You know who you were before before 
you became Number ninety-six i bowed 
in affirmation. 
Will you tell me your name i shook 
my head. 
He sat down felt my pulse looked at 
my tongue examined my eyes took my 
temperature. 
Everything normal he said when his 
examination was concluded. How is the 
pain in your limbs better. 

Did you have that before before you lost 
yourself? I made no answer. 
I think your locomotion has improved 
of late. Sit on the table here please let 
the leg hang naturally. He struck a sharp 
blow with the edge of his hand just below 
my knee. The foot flew forward a little 
way. 
Strange he said the last time I tried 
it the tendon was dead now it responds not 
fully of course but perceptibly. Do 
you know ninety-six you have had a won 
derful recovery it is not yet complete but 
<pb>
44 Cbc Oban 1111.10 Outliv.:B Ibimself. 
the cause of aberration seems to have dis 
appeared. How would you like a horseback 
ride? 
No doubt my face showed my pleasure. 
You were fond of horses well I have 
a splendid saddle beast and will let you ride 
him as often as you choose if you will tell me 
your name. 
I smiled at his shallow trick. I had be 
come more composed now and felt myself 
able to guard my secret. 
Doctor I said you have been kind to 
me I will be frank with you. I have been 
dead a good while and now I must take 
time to learn what has happened in the 
meantime and decide whether it would be 
best to go back to the old life or try to do 
so or 
Do you know how long it has been he 
interrupted. 
I pointed to the newspaper which lay folded 
under one of my books. 
Ah I see. Well he continued after a 
long pause I will be frank with you also. 
You were brought here eight years ago. No 
body knew anything about you. You were 
found wandering on a country highway said 
<pb>
ttbe Mn iglbo Qutliveo 1bimself. 45 
you had lost something and that some one 
was pursuing you. Then you were for a 
time in a county asylum where I found you 
and had you brought here because I thought 
you might be restored. There was something 
familiar about you especially your voice 
as if I had seen or known you before. 
Hundreds of people have been here looking 
for friends. No one recognised you. Some 
have looked at you who were not friends 
officers you know hunting for criminals. One 
time you came near being identified with a 
noted malefactor for whom a great reward 
was offered. Your teeth saved you. The man 
they sought had false teeth but one rarely 
sees a mouth like yours at your age I mean. 
You must be ?* 
twenty-five at least I should say Doc 
tor. I could not help laughing at his little 
tricks to catch me. 
You do not mean to give me any hints 
he responded with a smile. But you have. 
I have learned one thing at least. 
What is that you 
were a lawyer before you became my 
guest. 
Or a minister perhaps I suggested 
<pb>
46 ttbe Ran tuttbo ©utlivefc trtmself. 
holding up the little Bible I had been read 
ing. 
No your self command is too perfect for 
that. Had you committed any crime that 
you are afraid to be known his tone was 
anxious. 
Really Doctor I said with a laugh 
which I took pains to check before it was fullgrown 
suddenly remembering that my laugh 
had been a very characteristic one in the old 
days really I cannot say. I have a notion 
that I did but it is not that which determines 
me to keep silent. 
I see he answered laughing also you 
are on guard. I shall have to watch and 
wait. 
You will never succeed. 
Well he said in a tone that meant that 
he would never give up the attempt maybe 
you are right. But now that you are recover 
ing you must have a name. I do not wish 
you to be known as number ninety-six 
any longer. What shall it be why 
not John Smith too 
common. Try again. 
Nasmith then that is the negative 
Nay smith. 
<pb>
tlbe fban tolbo ©utliveo frtmself. 47 
A bad derivation but let that go. Any 
given name why 
not Claudius claudius 
Nasmith eh he looked at 
me a moment with his eyes half closed. 
Was it Claudius N. Smith he asked sud 
denly. 
Then I could not keep from laughing. 
I see Mr. Nasmith it is to be a long 
game. Did you play chess a 
little. 
Enough to know the meaning of check 
mate I suppose he asked significantly. 
Or stalemate I answered. 
Well he responded pleasantly it will 
be a fair game. Would you like to take a 
ride of course well I will come for you 
after awhile. good morning. 
He went out closed the door and shot the 
bolt. He did not yet believe in my com 
plete restoration. 
And I what do you think I did i sat 
for an hour repeating over to myself what 
had been said rejoicing with unspeakable 
rapture in the words which were as old 
friends friends met after long absence each 
one of whom brought greeting. How sweet 
<pb>
48 ttbe flban tkubo ©utlivefc hmmself. 
it was to know them how their syllables 
enchained my ear how rapturous to feel 
their signification to know their uses to play 
the never ending game of conversation once 
more i 
was not strong and rapture wearies. I 
fell asleep and when I woke Dr. Walcott was 
standing beside me and asking me to go down 
and lunch with him before we went to ride. 
Had the heavens opened I could not have 
been happier. If if only I knew about my 
wife i 
went down the flights of stairs and 
along the halls as if I had been a friend vis 
iting the institution. I was afraid I should 
shout for joy but knew it would not do to 
let my ecstasy be known. He led me to a 
pleasant room where stood a daintily ap 
pointed table and asked me to be seated. 
A great fear took hold upon me. Suppose 
all this should vanish suppose it were a 
dream one of the terrible dreams of the 
tomb wherein I had lain so long i caught 
his hand. 
Doctor give me something quick something 
something numbing ! 
<pb>
c'oc Ban tubo Outlivea Ibimseli:. 49 
Quiet! he said holding my hand with a 
crushing grip. 
It grew dark suddenly. A wave of black 
hopeless despair rolled over me. Was I slip 
ping back back into the night i was con 
scious of some stir about me. 
God send I have not been too hasty I 
dimly heard the Doctor say. I did not 
think he was so weak. 
A draught was put to my lips. When I 
came to myself I was in a little cottage out 
side the walls and the birds were singing in 
the vines that clustered about it. A few days 
afterwards I took the ride which had been de 
ferred. How luxurious the carriage seemed how 
incomparable the horses how inconceivably 
lovely the trees the lawns the 
everything i had been dead and was alive 
again i was taken to a tailor's and fitted 
with a suit of clothes. How soft the stuff 
seemed how lovely their sheen how 
delightful it was to feel them on my body every 
nerve kissed them with rapturous 
greeting. The dead was clothed in the gar 
ments of life. Lazarus was a gentleman 
once more. 
<pb>
IN a few months I had linked the prestnt 
firmly with the past. I had gone slowly and 
cautiously for I knew the good Doctor was 
watching me. Soon after my resurrection he 
had given me work in his office and I went 
wherever I chose without restraint. In the 
library to which I had constant access were 
bound files of several great daily newspapers 
extending back for a period of twenty years. 
I consulted them cautiously taking care that 
the attendant's notice was not attracted to the 
particular year of my demise. Indeed I began 
to read several years anterior to that date and 
restrained my burning desire as I waded with 
apparent interest through volumes in which 
every incident recited was as clear in my 
memory as on their pages aye clearer since 
the pages were already growing dim with age. 
wood pulp paper is a treacherous thing to 
intrust with the record of the past. Even a 
tottering intellect is a safer depository. 
At length I came to the very day of my de 
50 
<pb>
ttbe flban tkhbo ©utlivefc tlmself. 51 
raise. It was not mentioned in the journals 
of the succeeding day. On the next there was 
a mere notice of the disappearance and a hint 
of anxiety. On the day following the item 
had grown to the importance of a prominent 
paragraph and on the fifth day afterwards 
had reached the dignity of display headlines 
and first page position. 
I read all about myself my wife my home 
my financial troubles my disappearance. No 
one had seen me since I locked my office 
door that summer afternoon ten years before. 
There was no trace of me. A body had been 
found upon the ninth day floating in the 
river. It was thought it might have been 
mine but the eyes of love could not identify 
it and there was nothing on it to give certainty. 

From fear of what might be rather than 
from belief in the grim suggestion of identity 
it was given decent burial. I was glad for 
the other poor fellow who had stepped out of 
life simultaneously with me that his poor 
mortality had at least met with kindness. 
There was nothing more occasionally in the 
years that followed I found reference to the 
man who had been who bore the name I 
<pb>
52 Cbe Man tknbo ©utlix>eo timself. 
was entitled to resume if I chose to do so. 
Now and then I found slight references to my 
wife in some recent years my daughter had 
been mentioned she had been graduated 
had become an artist. 
How kind and appreciative all the notices 
on my disappearance were how they 
glossed over my faults and magnified my vir 
tues journals which had referred harshly to 
me when alive seemed filled with respect at 
my untimely taking off. And in all allusions 
to my wife and daughter there was a touching 
undertone of sympathy. I could see that they 
gave the girl kindly greeting out of regardful 
memory of the father she had lost. 
I should have wept as I read had not I 
feared to attract the attention of the attend 
ant who seemed always to be watching me. 
It may have been fancy but I was determined 
to give no clew by which my identity might 
be traced. Many nights I mused and wept 
as I thought over these kindly utterances 
while looking through the barred windows of 
my little room at the moonlit hills beyond 
the silver stream. Decidedly the world im 
proves when one looks back at it from the 
farther shore. 
<pb>
flban ttclbo ©utlivcf c Iblmself. 53 
I never read these messages of goodwill 
again lest I should awaken suspicion but I 
shall place an order with a clipping bureau 
which will cover them all if circumstances 
should permit. I am sure I shall feel kindlier 
toward many for a knowledge of the sympathy 
they expressed for one so little deserving. 

That was about all I could learn. It was 
enough to relieve my anxiety but not to show 
the course I ought to take. My health had 
steadily improved. The drag in my gait had 
almost disappeared. Sometimes I forgot the 
cane on which I had leaned so long. Almost 
every day I had ridden out on horseback. It 
was an exercise of which I was passionately 
fond and its effects had proved very beneficent. 

My work in the superintendent's office nad 
grown in importance and on the whole my 
life was a pleasant one. I had just deter 
mined on my future course when I was sum 
moned one day to the doctor's office. 
Well Nasmith was his cheerful greet 
ing the time has come when you must be 
discharged as cured. 
I have expected it I replied. 
<pb>
54 Gbe flban cclbo ©utlivef c Ibimself. 
Yes he continued there is no trace 
of aberration about you now except your 
foolish attempt to preserve the secret of your 
identity. 
It has been successful i suggested. 
Yes partially at least. I do not know 
who you are but I do know in part what you 
have been. For instance you served in the 
army and have been accustomed to com 
mand. 
On what do you base these conclusions on 
I don't know a thousand things. It 
shows in your face your tone your seat in 
the saddle and especially in your knowledge 
of military matters and the history of the war. 
You know we have been much together and 
I have been on the watch. 
So I supposed. 
Do you know your stubbornness has ex 
posed you to some danger or at least an 
noyance in 
what way a 
detective has been studying you is 
now trying to identify you with a criminal for 
whose arrest a great reward is offered. 
I smiled. 
I do not suppose there is real danger 
<pb>
Cbe fimn thubo ©utliveo tbiniaelf. 55 
the Doctor continued. You can probably 
identify yourself whenever you desire. 
Two words would suffice. 
Ah yes your name. It was well known 
perhaps where 
is the detective from chicago. 

I can identify myself there and would not 
object to the trip at another's expense you 
know. 
He will not venture on that. He will 
merely have you shadowed when you leave 
here. 
He can have my itinerary or rather you 
can and the name I shall assume. 
You do not mean to go back to your old 
life then? 
Under no circumstances. 
Are there not others who have a right to 
be considered none 
whose happiness would be promoted 
by such a course. 
Ought they not to be permitted to decide 
that? 
I shook my head. 
Where will you go to 
New York. 
<pb>
56 tlbe /imn tubo Outiivei> Iblmself 
What will you do? 
I shall seek employment. 
If you do not find it i 
think I shall. If I do not I may come 
back to you. Will you keep my place in your 
office open for me a month yes 
if you let me know your new name 
and where you will stay in the city. 
You are a Mason Doctor i asked giving 
him one of the many signs of the brother 
hood to which he made answer. 
Why did you not let me know of this 
before there 
was no need. 
Well it is another fact in your identification. 
I shall run you down yet. 
We laughed as we shook hands. I had 
been on the pay roll of the institution for 
some months and had a bit of money suffi 
cient for present needs. The institution 
paid my fare to the city. As I took the train 
the Doctor pressed my hand and glanced at a 
man just in advance of me. I understood it 
was the detective. When I got off the train 
he was waiting for me and sauntered up the 
platform toward the ferry. A crowd came 
between us. I sprang upon a train that was 
<pb>
Cbe flan iii bo ©utlivcd Ibimself. 57 
moving out and have never seen nim since. 
That night I returned with different clothes 
my hair clipped short and my beard pointed 
in the fashion of the times. I was a traveller 
too armed with grip and check those uni 
versal vouchers of respectability. Under my 
tongue I had placed a strip of silver which I 
had previously shaped and fitted in contemplation 
of this purpose. It made my voice 
unrecognisable yet not unnatural in sound. 
Going to the hotel where I had been accus 
tomed to stay in former years I wrote upon the 
register my new name the symbol of my 
resurrection. Only one person in the world 
knew of it and the secret was locked in his 
breast by the most solemn vows. So I began 
my new life burying forever all trace of the 
old. The Doctor might identify me with 
Claudius Nasmith and with Number Ninety 
six beyond that he could not go. 
<pb>
How familiar the ancient hostel seemed! 
one of those homelike inns which grow dearer 
every time one visits them because they are 
so homelike because they mind one of the 
past which the rushing present is crowding 
out of sight. No doubt this one is doomed. 
It occupies a most available location and the 
shadows of the new epoch fall darkly on it 
even now. 
Mindful of the breeze that comes up from 
the bay at eventide of the view from its win 
dows opening on the Square and especially 
of my little store of money I secured a small 
room just under the roof. The servant turned 
on the lights brought me a pitcher of ice 
water and retired. I locked the door lighted 
a cigar the first in a dozen years and sat 
down by the open window to view the flashing 
world without and think out the problem of 
how I could learn about those I loved without 
permitting them to know that he who had 
been so long dead was still alive. I did not 
53 
<pb>
Cbe flban Mbo ©utliveo Ibimself. 59 
mean under any circumstances to disclose 
my identity. If I found them in want I 
would get employment no matter what and 
send them all but what I might require for a 
bare livelihood. 
Even if I found them not in want but so 
situated that more might add to their comfort 
I would do the same. But under no circum 
stances would I consent to link myself again 
to the thread of life which fate had so com 
pletely severed. 
The cool breeze came in at the open win 
dow. The scene I looked on was enchant 
ment itself like and unlike the city I had 
known in that other life which it served to put 
farther and farther away. Electricity had 
come since my demise and the diamond 
white lights among the trees in the little 
Square were nothing less than magical substitutes 
for the flaring gas jets in their smoked 
and dingy cases which I had so often watched 
from the same outlook. How they flashed 
and gleamed! How the fountain glimmered 
in their light! I moved my head back and 
forth playing hide and seek with them among 
the leaves of the trees. I watched the people 
walking along the paths their shadows as 
<pb>
60 Cbe flban tsubo ©utlivea iminself. 
clear as at noonday and noted the curious 
sheen of the mammoth leaved foliage plants 
seen under the steely glare. 
Beyond them hundreds of gleaming lights 
marked some palace of trade or amusement 
I knew not which while along the other side 
of the Square where the old lumbering 
coaches used to go flashed every few minutes 
back and forth great cars all aglow with light 
and full of men and women whom I envied 
the delight of being moved so swiftly by an 
unseen force. On the morrow I determined 
I would make trial of the rapture for rapture 
I was sure it must be. Like the sweet poet I 
had loved so well 
I thought the air must seem as fresh 
To swallows on the wing. 
The horse cars which still crept along one 
side of the Square I greeted as old friends. 
How familiar the jingle of their bells and the 
slip of the iron shod hoofs on the worn pave 
ments the 
eternal roar of the echoing streets came 
up through the ray pierced darkness. Over 
against where I sat loomed the dark outline 
of a building I judged yet unfinished. I had 
read of the sky scrapers but only caught 
<pb>
Ran tkubo ©utlivefc f>imself. 6i 
glimpses of them from the cab windows on my 
way from the station. I counted the stories 
in the grim grey skeleton. There were eleven 
or twelve I could not make out which that 
showed above the five storied building across 
the Square. 
Through the lacework of leaves shone a 
maze of lights into which the flashing cars 
disappeared on their down town way and out 
of which they leapt on their return. How 
my heart beat with eagerness for the day to 
come that I might try their delights it 
never once occurred to me that I had only to 
go down the street walk a block and whirl 
through the lighted thoroughfare back and 
forth to my heart's content. It may seem 
strange that it did not but in eight years I 
had been but three times outside the walls of 
the institution after dark. It still seemed 
as if all doors locked on the outside. 
How clean the streets were i had never 
seen anything like it. Looking down into 
the circle of light the pavements seemed 
without trace of the day's traffic. Over at 
the corner of the Square were two white 
spots which I judged to be pieces of paper. 
That was the only sign of stain or litter. 
<pb>
ttbe fiban tkttbo ©utlivef c Tblmself. 
Could it be that this was the city I had 
known and that I was no I was not. 
The city was the same only glorified but I 
I was dead and this man who looked out 
of the window alternately smiling and weep 
ing he was another a man without any 
past to be recalled without any future to 
anticipate. 
All night I sat and watched the never 
slumbering city. All night the white lights 
flashed and blinked under the leaden sky. 
All night the cars went back and forth like 
golden shuttles somewhat rarer after mid 
night but to me an ever growing marvel. 
In the early morning some sweeping 
machines went by. The rain began to fall 
gently. Men with white uniforms and brooms 
began to sweep the streets and brush unseen 
particles out of the crannies between the 
rough paving. The roar of the city came up 
like the echo of battle across the forgotten 
years. With the dawn I closed the shutter 
and lay down upon my bed to sleep though I 
was not weary with my vigil. 
I had thought out my problem in those 
silent hours and determined on the course I 
would pursue. I had grown suspicious of the 
<pb>
Cbe shan tube Outiivef c f>imself. 63 
Doctor and feared some one might be in wait 
for me in the little town where I had lived 
hoping to identify me with the man who was 
dead. So I determined to wait and see the 
city before making any effort to learn more 
of those he had loved. 
<pb>
CHAPTER vii 
WHO shall tell what marvels one sees who 
has been dead only a paltry dozen years the 
next morning I thought I would ride on 
the cable cars all day. It seemed to me I 
should never tyre of such delight. I went and 
stood by the track watching them whiz by for 
quite a time before I ventured to board one. 
The sensation was all I had expected and 
more. What a wonderful thing is this Broad 
way which I seemed never to have known 
before though the dead man whose memory 
I had fallen heir to was very familiar with it 
from the stage windows somewhere above 
One Hundredth Street I grew rather timid. 
It seemed as if I had gotten beyond recollection. 
So I left the car and took one going 
back. Still wonders multiplied. At Wall 
Street I got off and wandered about a little. 
It was the same yet not the same. I grew 
faint as the old familiar tide ebbed and flowed 
about me and the clatter of the tickers in 
an office I entered made me sick. I hurried 
64 
<pb>
Cbe flban Ulbo ©utlivef c fbiniselt. 65 
back to Broadway took a car and returned to 
my hotel blinded stunned and trembling. 
The old prickling agony was in my limbs and 
that fear of lapse into vacancy which was not 
so very far away got hold upon me so that I 
crept shivering to bed and after an hour of 
apprehension pain and confusion fell asleep. 
It was almost noon of the next day when I 
awoke. The shock of the city's throbbing 
life was too much for one who had been dead 
so long to bear without gradual induration to 
its potency. It was night after the day's 
rush was over that I went out again to come 
back weary and excited but filled with the 
divine pleasure the knowledge of new and un 
expected things always brings. 
Thus day after day I explored the redis 
covered city with a closer approach to happiness 
than I had expected ever again to taste. 
I seemed to see what accustomed eyes neglected. 
The people had changed as well as 
the city as I learned after a few days observation. 
There were not the old crowds nor 
the old righting rushes at the points of in 
gress and egress. The proportion of women 
on the cars and in the streets was much 
greater. They were different too more self 
<pb>
66 Cb Ohm Mbo ©utllveo 1bimself. 
reliant and matter of course than they had 
been or perhaps I should say less inclined 
to be timid and self conscious. 
It fascinated me and yet disturbed me too 
the easy unconsciousness with which they 
mingled with the crowds apparently asking 
no favour because of their womanhood. 
Among the elder ladies I saw the more fa 
miliar spirit that I recognised the constant 
fear not so much of slight or neglect but of 
doing that which might be deemed unseemly 
that the younger generation so wholly lacked 
or at least seemed to lack. 
The change in costume did not greatly im 
press me. As a rule dress looked hardly so 
elaborate and appeared to require less attention 
from the wearer and to demand less at 
tention from the beholder. In the walk of 
the younger and fairer portion of the ever 
beautiful tide of life I watched day after day 
I noted a curious change of gait or rather 
perhaps in the style of walking since gait 
may be too technical a term distinguishing 
between walking and running rather than be 
tween the qualities of either. 
What I mean is that the general walk had 
not the careful grace of the old time. There 
<pb>
flban Mbo ©utliveo f>imself. 67 
was none of that rhythmic lateral swing which 
once enchanted the eye. The step seemed to 
be higher more straightforward and abrupt 
than I had ever observed before in consequence 
of which the skirt swung not alter 
nately from side to side as I remember that 
it used to do but appeared to flop ungracefully 
against the limbs to prevent which it 
was sometimes clutched desperately at the 
side and not seldom defiantly lifted up by 
protruding heels. I confess I did not like it 
but one who has been dead so long should 
not set himself up to criticise the fashions 
especially of those whose loveliness defies 
criticism. And I did not criticise only it 
troubled me to find anything in my new world 
that was not more delightful than aught that 
was in the one I remembered. 
Perhaps the fault is in me. I am convinced 
that young eyes are better judges of grace and 
beauty than old ones. And it gives me infinite 
pleasure to see the game of love going on 
everywhere in new ways and between new 
types but sweet and joyous as ever. 
The young lady of today is evidently 
stronger and healthier than her mother. She 
is also taller. I wonder why it is. They 
<pb>
68 Cbe flban tkubo ©utliveo fcimself. 
seem taller than the young men upon an average. 
To look at them upon the street or 
in the cars it seems as if the old relation was 
changing and the woman coming to be the 
larger and the stronger type. 
The men of the younger generation are 
shorter and more generally anxious and care 
worn than I had ever noted before. I won 
der if it is only a fancy or a fact of today's 
life. 
But in some respects the people have im 
proved even more than the beautiful city 
beautiful with a new and unlooked-for love 
liness. One might have heard nay could 
not have helped hearing more profanity in 
walking half a dozen blocks on Broadway a 
dozen years ago than he will hear in an all 
day's experience with its crowds today. 
Men have strangely softened in tone and 
manner. There is less of formality and less 
of boisterousness at least there seems to be 
to one who had so long been accustomed to 
quietude. 
The days slipped by not unpleasantly. I 
met many whom I knew and was often on 
the point of self betrayal but not one gave 
me a glance of recognition or even a ques 
<pb>
Cbe flban tiwlbo ©utlivea hmmself. 69 
tioning look so I was saved from unconscious 
revelation of my identity. I think I seemed 
much younger than I should had the lost 
years been passed in the haunts of business 
instead of a seclusion free from care. At 
least none knew my face and the bit of silver 
underneath my tongue effectually disguised 
my voice. 
One day the car on which I rode was 
blocked on lower Broadway while the Vice 
roy of China passed by escorted by two 
squadrons of cavalry. How my heart throbbed 
as the bay horses of the Sixth Cavalry 
came on at a sharp trot! The men had the 
same easy upright seat I remembered so well 
in the long ago. The trot half a single foot 
and the riders not merely jaunty but the 
same cool earnest fellows I had known when 
one who was forgotten was the guest of their 
commander at their Western cantonment 
their commander who had been his comrade. 
How I scanned the brown faces under the 
shakos in the hungry hope of recognising one 
of these old friends of course it was fool 
ish to expect it. Men do not stay forever in 
the same rank even if there is no war to in 
crease the supply of dead men's shoes. 
<pb>
7° Cbe flban Mbo ®utllv?eo hmmself. 
The cortege halted just as the viceroy's 
carriage came opposite our car and I scanned 
eagerly the strong un oriental face. How 
many years was it since the incomparable 
Grant had spoken in my hearing of this same 
man in terms of admiration almost of affection 
beside him sat a grey haired soldier. 
It was thirty-one years ago and a few months 
since a young staff officer last reported to him 
for orders. Since that time but why think 
of it? His past is bright mine forever 
clouded. I have a strange longing to call 
myself to his memory to go and see him 
but I never shall. Death bars the pleasures 
of memory and blights those of hope. I have 
no yesterday and can have no tomorrow. 
<pb>
CHAPTER viii 
I WAS greatly depressed by this glimpse of 
the life of which I had been a part and de 
termined at once to turn my attention to the 
real object of my visit to the city and decide 
as to the course I should pursue hereafter. 
The past I saw more and more clearly every 
day was irrevocable the future depended 
on what duty I might owe to others. If there 
were need that I should do so I would remain 
and labour for the comfort of those I loved 
if there were none I would go back to the 
institution and take up the work of Claudius 
Nasmith the superintendent's clerk. It was 
an honourable occupation and quite good 
enough to serve as the grave of a half life. It 
would not be for long at most. 
The next day I went to see the man who 
had been my nearest friend in the old days. 
I had met him half a dozen times upon the 
street cars and knew he would not recognise 
me. Indeed I had purposely thrown myself 
in his way to make sure of the fact. I called 
71 
<pb>
72 tube /iban iclbo ©utlivc& ibimcelf. 
at his office and sent in my card on which I 
had written A friend of Philip Devens. 
It was the first time I had written the name 
since the day that Devens died. I remembered 
signing it to the last letter he ever 
wrote addressed to this very man. 
I was most cordially received. This busy 
prosperous man had not forgotten nor ceased 
to mourn his old friend. I longed to throw 
myself upon his neck to confess my identity 
to thank him for his remembrance. But I 
knew it was better that he should remember 
and regret than know and pity perhaps de 
spise. I therefore restrained myself as we 
shook hands. He led me to a chair and sat 
down beside me. 
I was the elder by a year but the battle of 
life had left its scars deep graven on his face 
while the inert brain had traced few furrows 
upon mine. I did not need to talk. The 
name of his old friend had opened the flood 
gates of his memory. 
And you knew Devens? he said while 
tears gathered in his eyes. Poor fellow poor 
fellow yes he disappeared a dozen 
years ago stepped out of life into oblivion in 
an hour. Left his office hale hearty hope 
<pb>
Cbe /iban Idbo ©utliveo Ibimself. 73 
full in broad open day a man loved trusted 
admired by all who knew him and known by 
thousands yet never was seen or heard of 
afterwards. Every possible effort was made 
to find some trace of him but in vain. Not 
even a hint of his fate has ever been re 
ceived. 
For a year I kept hoping and searching. 
Advertisements detectives everything. Not 
a word not a trace. It was the most remark 
able disappearance ever known. If alive how 
could he hide amid the universal hue and 
cry if dead how was it possible that none 
should know how he died detectives were 
baffled. Rewards failed. It will ever remain 
an unsolved mystery. I had all the insane 
asylums searched. There were many un 
known but none in the least resembling him. 
His wife kept up the search long after I 
abandoned it. I do not think she has even 
yet given over the hope of finding him. 
She is alive then i managed to ask. 
My tongue was dry and my voice startled me. 
I need have had no fear. He was too sure of 
his friend's death to note any resemblance if 
any yet remained. 
Alive and prosperous he replied briskly 
<pb>
74 ttbe Aan tolbo ©utliveo timself. 
as if glad to turn away from the sorrowful 
past. You see things took a turn almost 
from the hour when Philip disappeared. Poor 
fellow! he had staked everything on a rise in 
the c c c I know it worried him terribly 
and I suppose that is really what led to his 
disappearance. Fortunately he had borrowed 
a little money of me that very day and given 
me an assignment of his interests. So I knew 
who were his brokers and had authority to 
act for him. 
The stock which had been falling for 
weeks began to go up. I let it climb until 
I thought it had about reached its limit 
sold out and had endugh profit to enable his 
widow or his wife as she persists in thinking 
herself still to be to pay off all philip's debts 
and leave a little nest egg over. 
Then the boom he had been waiting 
for so confidently came along and struck 
some real estate he had bought which 
doubled up in price as if really gloating over 
his disappearance. His wife managed things 
handsomely and in a year or two had quite a 
little competency. 
I suppose she got some life insurance i 
asked. 
<pb>
Ran ttclbo ©utliveo ibimself. 75 
Well that was another curious thing. 
Shows how much luck there is in life. 
The policy twenty-five thousand dollars 
was one of those tontine endowment af 
fairs having a dozen conditions but only 
ten annual payments. He had just about 
broken his back to pay nine of them. If 
the company admitted his death they must 
pay the whole if they did not she had a 
right to pay the other premium and choose 
the form of liquidation she preferred. She 
would not believe in philip's death so made 
the last payment and then elected to take the 
lump sum offered instead of leaving the 
policy or any part of it in effect. Of course 
the company were glad to do that so she 
got a nice little plum without any hard feel 
ings or any proof of death. 
Indeed the company were so struck with 
her business ability and character that they 
offered her a position in their office you 
know she writes like copperplate and has a 
presence worth a fortune in any business. 
The offer suited her down to the ground 
for she likes business as well as a man could. 
As a result she has been earning a better 
salary ever since than Philip ever got in his 
<pb>
7 & ttbe Ran tkubo ©utlivea Iblmself. 
life though he was no slouch and earned a 
good deal of money more than he could 
keep after he got it. 
It is strange she has not married I suggested 
with a choking sensation at my throat. 
Not a bit. You see she loved Philip 
Devens as well she might. He was a man 
to get and hold a woman's love or a man's 
for that matter. There was too the doubt 
whether he was alive or dead and no shadow 
of necessity for her to marry. She had offers 
without number. I have reason to believe 
she never told me or hinted it but I happen 
to have learned the fact that the president of 
the insurance company was anxious to make 
her his wife. 
No doubt she liked him and it was a 
chance that might well have made any 
woman a little giddy. But it didn't faze 
her a minute. Wife or widow she said she 
was devens's for time and for eternity. And 
that was all there was of it. A couple of 
years ago when her daughter left school she 
retired from the company's service and has 
been living quietly in the house he built and 
which she has greatly improved. 
And the daughter i asked huskily. 
<pb>
Ran tkflbo ©utlivefc toimeelt. 77 
She is like her father full of ideas sen 
sitive an artist I fear a genius. They are 
devoted to each other. I had a letter from 
her just the other day. By the way she 
writes like her father I wish I had the letter 
here to show you but I took it home for 
my wife to read. She wrote that they had 
leased the house and are to sail the last of 
the month for a long stay abroad. I hope 
they will have a good time nobody ever 
deserved it better. 
That was all. I bade my friend adieu 
and made my way stunned and hopeless back 
to my hotel and up to the little room under 
the roof. The roar of the city was a thing 
of terror to me now. I hated its light and 
the happy throngs upon its streets. Closing 
the shutters I threw myself upon the bed. 
My dream was ended. Even the hope of 
sacrifice for her I loved was gone. She was 
happy prosperous content. I would go and 
look upon her face once more and then re 
turn to my desk. Philip Devens was for 
ever dead Claudius Nasmith would soon 
die. I wrote to my friend the Doctor that 
I would return and take up my work naming 
the day and train by which I would arrive. 
<pb>
CHAPTER ix 
GOD forgive me but I am afraid that the 
story I had heard of my wife's heroic en 
deavor and good fortune gave me more unhappiness 
than pleasure. It hurt rne to think 
that she had done so well without me that 
she had succeeded where I had failed in the 
struggle for wealth. I would not have had 
her suffer but I am afraid sorely afraid 
that I would have liked it better if she had 
not been so prosperous as to make my earn 
ings a matter of no moment. 
Whether this feeling arose from that sen 
sitiveness which always affects one whose 
mental equilibrium has been for a time dis 
turbed or was merely the result of the fact 
that I am a man I cannot tell. Perhaps no 
man quite relishes the thought that those he 
loves are able to exist without his care and 
assistance. He thinks God made him the 
bread winner perhaps the dictator of the 
domestic circle and is never quite willing to 
abdicate in favour of another even if that 
other be proved to be of superior efficiency. 
78 
<pb>
ttbe Man tbubo Outlivefc ifoimsclf. 79 
At any rate what I had heard added 
greatly to the humiliation of my position. I 
not only would not go into that Eden mar 
its joys and bring shame to those whom I 
loved but even if I had been willing to sub 
ject them to such trial I could not endure 
the thought of being looked upon as a de 
pendent. I had dreamed some rather 
pleasant things during the days I had spent 
in my little room under the eaves in the old 
hostel and watched the ebb and flow of 
which I would fain become once more a part. 
I had dreamed that I would secure employ 
ment. Then I would hunt some little nook 
where I could live and work and find a way 
to transmit to those I loved the proceeds of 
my labour without their being able to trace its 
source. 
The idea fascinated me. I had even 
begun to carry it into effect. An article or 
two had been accepted by the periodicals. 
I was sure I could make my new name re 
spectable in the literary world and earn at 
least a livelihood perhaps something more. 
One does not love oblivion but I saw it was 
my doom my inevitable destiny. There 
was nothing else for me I would go and 
<pb>
So nbe flban xiubo Outlives himself. 
look upon her fair sweet face once more and 
then sink again into eternal night. 
So I planned that the next day I would go 
and look at my old home the home she had 
so much improved. I had still two days 
before I should need to take my place in 
the institution. I was resolved never 
again to leave the shelter of its walls. I 
would remain in the city until the next after 
noon I really was not able to go before the 
shock of the day's experience had been so 
great then I would go out see the home I 
had never loved so well get a glimpse of 
those who were so dear and go from thence 
to the sepulchre hewn out of rock which 
waited for me in the glittering Gehenna on 
on the green hillside. 
On the morrow I sauntered about bidding 
farewell to the city which had so charmed 
me in the brief period of rejuvenescence. I 
was not sorry to leave it now. Hope was dead 
and there is no glamour without it. Already I 
had begun to long for my little room with the 
grated windows. The world had nothing for 
me and I grew eager to escape once more 
from even the sight of its blustering life. 
I had entered the diningroom of the hotel 
<pb>
be /liban tobo 0utliveo Ibimself. 81 
for my last meal there. With the in 
consistency of a man under sentence of 
death I determined that it should be a good 
one and gave a lavish order. My farewell 
to the world should at least be elaborate. I 
had just finished the first course when two 
ladies entered and were marshalled by the 
head waiter along the avenue between the 
little tables toward the one I occupied. I 
glanced at the one in front tall slender full 
of grace but unshrinking and composed a 
perfect type of the new woman. I had 
been studying of late. Behind her I caught 
a glimpse of grey hair and smiled in spite of 
my despondency to think how at the century's 
ending today unconsciously took the lead 
of yesterday. 
Something about the face attracted me 
and it was not until they were almost opposite 
the table where I sat that I noted that of the 
elder lady. It needed but a glance the 
hair was grey the form had lost something 
of its grace but the unforgotten glory of a 
face lighted with the radiance of undying 
love hid all else from my sight blotted all 
else from my thought. 
Across unnoted years I gazed into the face 
<pb>
8z Cbe /hsan 111 bo qutlix>ea Iblmself. 
of my wife no not my wife the wife of 
Philip Devens. As she came opposite where 
I sat her eyes met mine. A look of sudden 
terror filled them. The colour fled from her 
face and left it white as marble. She stum 
bled and I thought would have fallen but 
she caught the waiter's outstretched hand 
and was seated in the chair at my back. I 
had only to turn and stretch forth my hand 
to touch her to take her in my arms to be 
Devens again. I could not! I would not why 
mamma what is the matter? the 
young lady exclaimed. 
How the tone thrilled me! It was my 
daughter whose words I heard the tone my 
very own young feminine refined but 
mine beyond mistake. I could not hear the 
whispered answer. 
Oh mamma came the tenderly reproach 
full response. Will you never give over the 
vain search you know how long it has been 
hopeless. 
But I never before saw one so like him 
was the reply. Do you not see the resem 
blance you 
know dear I never saw papa with a 
bald head. 
<pb>
Ube /foaii Mbo ©utiivef c Dimself. 83 
The voice was mirthful despite its tender 
ness. Bless the dear heart she was very 
gently leading the too faithful memory away 
from the fancied resemblance. 
I called the waiter and in a loud harsh 
voice that I knew would bring disillusion to 
the tender heart demanded my card and 
strode out of the room. I knew their eyes were 
fixed upon me and did not once look back. 
But a moment after I stole by the door and 
gazed a full minute at them as they bent their 
heads over the narrow table in earnest con 
versation. 
When each had settled back in her chair 
again the light of hope had gone out of that 
sweet elder face and a grey dull despair had 
taken its place. I did not need to look upon 
the register for the name Mrs. Philip Devens 
and daughter. 
I knew it was there but I started when I 
saw it written in a hand so like my own in 
stead of that which I longed to see again. 
today had blotted out yesterday. I am not 
sure I did not feel some resentment toward 
the child who had grown to be more than a 
child to the bereaved mother. 
There was no longer any need for me to 
<pb>
84 Cbe /ifiait Ulbo ©utllveo Ibimself. 
visit the country home. Though I loved it 
as one loves only the first home consecrated 
by sweet tender memories of the first love I 
knew that even the improvements she had 
made would hurt me as suggesting how much 
better off she was without him she had lost. 
I had seen the Eden I must not enter. I 
could not blight those spotless lives with the 
stain of one inexplicable without confession 
of a taint which no merit can ever wash away 
and no charity forget. If I had returned 
from the dead with a great fortune all would 
have been well. But poverty and insanity 
how could I ask them to bear such a burden that 
night Claudius Nasmith reported for 
duty at the institution and went back to 
his little vine covered cottage which over 
looked the valley already growing dull and 
sere under the hot breath of tl« last perfervid 
summer days The rain fell drearily all night 
long as he pressed a pale face racked with 
agony against the grated window of his tomb 
the tomb he had reentered of his own ac 
cord and did not hope nor wish to leave. 
<pb>
CHAPTER x 
MR. NASMITH said Dr. Walcott in his 
hearty cheerful tone which commanded 
while it asked I have to go to the station 
with some ladies and wait for the next train 
Would you not like to go along i shall be 
alone on the return trip. It was a week 
after my return. I do not think I wished to 
go. I did not wish anything except to please 
the one friend I had in all the world the 
Doctor. Even this was not a very acute 
sentiment but I answered cheerfully enough 
I suppose anything 
you wish Doctor. 
Well get your coat while I light a cigar. 
I have been so b^sy today I have not even 
had a whiff. 
The Doctor was standing by the carriage 
door under the port cochere when I re 
turned. 
This way he said briskly. The lamp 
has gone out. Careful about the steps. Here 
you are. 
85 
<pb>
/imn Tldbo ©utliveo Ibimself. 
He took my arm as he spoke ladies 
this is my friend Mr. Nasmith. He is a much 
better man than I am and does not smoke. 
He bundled me into the carriage as he 
spoke sprang up to the seat with the driver 
and we dashed out into a winter night black 
as Erebus with cloud and mist. 
Really ladies I began but got no 
farther. A soft hand had clasped mine and 
was holding it in a fervent grip. I was seized 
with sudden terror. I have a horror of insane 
people which my stay in the institution 
had done nothing to lessen. I was about to 
cry out when a voice I can never forget said husband 
do you not know me oh 
Papa cried a voice from the front 
seat and a pair of plump arms were flung 
about my neck. We have found you. Kiss 
me Papa after 
that I know not what happened. I 
embraced one and then the other. There 
were te ars and tender ejaculations but few 
words no explanations. At length the car 
riage stopped the door opened the Doctor 
got in and we drove on again. 
Well Major he said and there was a 
note of triumph in his voice I am afraid I 
<pb>
ttbe flftan Wlbo ©utlivefc t>imself. 87 
have lost an invaluable clerk but I hope I 
have gained some friends. 
Doctor I said this is not fair. You 
promised 
Stop my dear fellow. I learned your 
secret months ago. 
How do 
you remember a little book Devens 
wrote about a midsummer holiday? 
Of course. 
Well I had your reading in the library 
watched and every book you opened reported 
to me. You not only read this more than 
once and seemed much affected by it but 
you corrected an error which none but the 
author would have noted a single word that 
changed the whole tenor of a sentence. This 
was enough I remembered you at once. I 
hope you will not think hard of me. Of 
course you will think no more of the only 
delusion you have ever had that you must 
not resume your place in the world doctor 
do you not see will you not see 
that I cannot go back cannot take up 
the old life hold 
on my good friend. Do not be 
rash. We are near the station. The Presi 
<pb>
Aan ibubo ©utlivefc fl>imself. 
dent's car is waiting for us. I asked him to 
let me have it tonight. We will go aboard 
and talk the matter over. 
But you you will go with us Doctor where 
to 
the city. I can decide nothing think 
of nothing now. 
Just as you wish. Hold on to yourself 
old fellow. 
He took my hand in a grip which was like 
steel despite the softness of his palm. 
I will I answered do not fear only 
give me time. 
We boarded the car a luxurious affair. 
They laid me on a couch and I fell asleep 
almost at once. When I woke a soft hand 
was clasping mine and the dawn showed a 
face radiant with love bending over me. 
We went to the old hotel. I insisted on 
registering under my new name it was in 
fact part of the old one my mother's name 
which I had dropped when a boy. I asked 
for my little room under the eaves and begged 
to be left alone until I should call. All day 
I paced the narrow room. 
the 
struggle is over. Love has conquered 
<pb>
flban ttclbo ©utliveo f>imself. 89 
not me but her. I shall not go back to 
the old life but she will enter oblivion with 
me. tomorrow this notice will be in all the 
papers. The Doctor has just read it to me. 
He has been the wise true friend who has 
brought possible peace out of woe impossible 
to be endured a 
romantic incident occurred at one of 
our best known hotels last night. Mrs. 
Devens the widow of Major Philip Devens 
whose sudden and mysterious disappearance 
some years ago brought grief to so many 
friends was united in marriage to Mr. Arthur 
Quitman. A curious thing about the mar 
riage is that the bridegroom was not only a 
warm friend of the former husband but is 
understood to have been a suitor for the hand 
of the bride before her first marriage. Only 
a few friends were present at the ceremony a 
pleasant feature of which was that the bride's 
daughter insisted on giving the bride away. 
The bride groom and daughter sail on the 
Britannic today. The groom is a wealthy 
cattleman of Texas who only recently came 
to this city and incidentally learned that his 
old sweetheart was alive a widow and not 
remarried. A rumour of her engagement to 
<pb>
90 Cbe Man iclbo Outlived fbimself. 
another had reached his ears and prevented 
him from making himself known years ago. 
It is understood that they will remain abroad 
for some years and a wide circle of friends 
will wish them the happiness they so well 
deserve. 
The good Doctor knows as well how to 
concoct prescriptions for the credulous public 
as for an individual patient. If what he has 
written is not all true it is what every one who 
reads will wish to be true and it makes easy 
the transition to the new life while putting 
an impervious seal upon the tomb in which 
the old is inurned. I go from my little room 
in which the new began to the spacious 
chamber Devens and his young wife occupied 
upon their wedding journey five and 
twenty years ago. 
If the life is a new one the love is old. I 
am eager for the months to pass by that we 
may return and pick up some of the lost 
threads of friendship. And our daughter 
already I am her slave and feel that in her 
life my own will be renewed. 
<pb>
poor Joel flmfce. 
<pb>
poor Joel bmfce. 
CHAPTER I. 
IT was a stinging midwinter morning. The 
day before the earth had been covered with 
sleet which had fallen upon a foot of hard 
beaten snow then the wind died away 
the mercury crept below zero and the snow 
began to fall the light flakes came softly 
waveringly out of the leaden sky through 
the still freezing air lodging on every twig 
hanging in great white puffs upon the eaves 
of all the houses heaped on every railing 
cushioning everything that could hold a 
feather's weight. All night long this breath 
less freezing calm had continued and all 
night long the silent flakes had fallen so that 
when the morning came the earth was hidden 
beneath a coverlet as white as swan's down 
and as light. The sun lit millions of tiny 
93 
<pb>
94 oor Joel 
many hued fires in the icy prisms and filled 
the shadows with pale bluish light. The 
fleecy mass did not reflect the sunshine but 
absorbed it giving back softly varied tones 
rather than the hard glaring light of the 
ordinary snow surface. The world was like a 
marble tomb for whiteness and for silence 
but like a coverlet of down for softness and 
invitation to repose. 
The trees whose branches were bare seen 
at a little distance merged into the universal 
whiteness near at hand they seemed a network 
of soft white filaments which tempted 
the eye to pursue with unceasing delight the 
intricacies of an ever changing pattern. The 
evergreens in the yards upon the public 
squares and on the distant hillsides bore 
tiny heaps of down upon every flattened sur 
face and above the spreading laterals were 
great swelling heaps as smoothly rounded 
and as white as a thrifty housewife's pillows. 
A hint of green showed at the very tips of the 
bent down limbs and in the spaces between 
the overhanging screens. The smoke rose 
from the chimneys in straight dun columns 
the tops flattened into creamy waves which 
melted imperceptibly into sunlit space. 
<pb>
poor Joel plte. 95 
The snow was so light and the flakes of that 
gauzy network were so solidly frozen and so 
deftly interlocked that it formed great cush 
ions on all surfaces approximating the horizontal 
without crushing and sliding. In the 
streets or on the level as we say it came 
above the knee but one waded through it as 
easily as if it were the fluffiest of lint cotton. 
It was not damp enough to pack beneath the 
feet nor hard enough to grind like sand. In 
truth it seemed rather to yield in all directions 
like vapour than to suffer compression like 
ordinary snow. Dogs ran about in it where 
it was above their heads leaving only a trembling 
sinuous line marked perhaps by the tip 
of a waving tail showing above the white sur 
face. After going a little way they would 
abandon this method and proceed by a series 
of leaps above and plunges into the yielding 
mass. 
In the little town of Hardinsville the people 
were late astir. The frost had crept into 
the houses and chilled the housewives ardour 
while the breathless calm without had de 
ceived the sleepers accustomed to have their 
ears confirm the clanging story which the 
town clock's brazen tongue avouched with 
<pb>
circumstantial evidence that the world was 
awake and astir. But even the cock's crow 
was muffled in the universal flocculence and 
the outside world was as silent as the realm 
of shadows. When they at length appeared 
outside their doors they noted some curious 
effects. The snow was so light there was no 
resonance. Voices near at hand sounded 
weak and thin. The stillness seemed really 
palpable. One saw that people were clearing 
off the sidewalks and shovelling paths that 
they were calling to each other across the 
streets that children and dogs were playing 
in the downy snow but only those sounds 
close at hand could be heard and they were 
greatly softened. 
The town was usually a busy one but this 
morning no one seemed to think of work. 
Clerks and employe's alike stood gazing out 
of the windows. The cobbler sat with his 
awl hand upon the awl which he had driven 
home but forgotten to draw out while the 
blacksmith the earliest and noisiest of work 
ers let the fire die upon his forge while he 
stood in the door of his shop gazing in si 
lence on the unwonted scene. Beauty in its 
highest manifestations touches all natures 
<pb>
ftoor Joel pifce. 97 
and hushes them like the roar of the cata 
ract. And this was a sight so unusual that 
even one accustomed to a snowy region 
would hardly see its like twice in a lifetime. 
Even yet it is remembered as the winter of 
the feather snow. I can never forget it. 
I had built the fire swept the floor and 
cleared the walk in front of our office before 
most of the inhabitants were astir. I say 
our office because I was then a student in 
the office of Harman ruggles the leading 
practitioners of the county. The law styled 
me an articled clerk but as a matter of 
fact the chief services I had been called upon 
to render as an equivalent for the privileges I 
enjoyed had been the work I have described. 
To this was added an occasional dusting of 
the books and the doing of such errands as 
he members of the firm might require. I 
fid a little copying and now and then was 
asked to write some formal letters. 
In consideration of these services I enjoyed 
privileges which to my mind seemed infinitely 
more valuable as indeed they were. I 
was allowed to read the books of the firm to 
sit by their fire and listen to the conversation 
that went on in the office. It might not be 
<pb>
supposed that this latter privilege would be 
of any great moment but to me it was worth 
all the rest. I was a country boy whose 
mother had worked and saved during all my 
life to give me an education. She was not 
poor but the woman who makes a living out 
of a little farm like ours must often work as 
hard and use as much economy as if she had 
only her daily labour to rely upon. She had 
early set her heart upon my being a lawyer 
and after a few terms at the academy and a 
winter or two spent in teaching I had begun 
on my twenty-first birthday the study of my 
profession. I was supposed to be under the 
tuition of the firm but aside from an intro 
ductory talk by the senior in regard to the 
books I should read and the order in which 
they should be read I do not remember ever 
to have received a suggestion from either of 
the partners. Yet if their tuition was of the 
scantiest the freedom of the office more than 
made up for it. Every case was discussed 
in open council. I was expected to hunt 
authorities and was free to ask any question 
I chose in regard to the matter in hand. 
The result was an unconscious familiarity 
not only with the principles of the law but 
<pb>
with its application and a readiness in the 
use of that wonderful array of books which 
are the real tools of the profession which 
cannot well be otherwise acquired. It is this 
which makes the country lawyer's office the 
best place in the world to study law. 
The labour required of me did not seem 
menial as it would now and I looked for 
ward with confidence to the time when I 
should be a full fledged attorney own a 
house in that village or some other have my 
mother and some one else to live with me 
and be on the road towards that success 
which every man desires. I had even gone 
so far as to picture to myself who the other 
one should be though I never breathed a 
word of it to her and if she guessed the 
truth it was without conscious hint from me. 
I had an impression that she had done so 
and was thinking of her while looking out of 
the window that very morning when the 
partners constituting the firm of Harmon ruggles 
reached the office. The younger 
soon turned to his work but the senior could 
hardly wait to warm his fingers before he 
sauntered back to the window to gaze upon 
the scene without 
<pb>
ioo poor Joel plfce. 
Ordinarily the streets of the country town 
were thronged with vehicles at an early hour 
especially if the sleighing were good. On 
this morning the first sign of external life was 
a sled drawn by a pair of bright red oxen 
who with upraised heads came briskly down 
the long hill that lay to the westward. 
Floundering through the deep snow the 
clumsy beasts threw up little waves of frosty 
particles on either side. Cones of white 
vapour shot from their nostrils congealed in 
the frosty air and settled in rims upon their 
furry flanks. The driver stood leaning against 
the cross bar of a high wood rack looking this 
way and that at the unusual spectacle. His 
whiplash dragged over the side of the sled 
making a long wavy line in the soft flocculent 
mass. Occasionally he raised it in absentminded 
fashion only to let it fall back again 
into the snow. 
He waked out of his indifference however 
as he approached the office of Harmon ruggles. 
His right arm shot out the long 
lash uncoiled and the cracker snapped in the 
near ox's ear then it hissed through the 
air again and fell sharply on the flank of his 
mate. Haw! haw shouted a shrill 
<pb>
metallic voice. The obedient beasts broke 
into an awkward trot veered to the left and 
at the word halted before the office door 
threw up their heads stuck out their white 
dripping noses about which hung masses of 
short icicles rolled their bright liquid eyes 
set in a circlet of frosty lashes and watched 
the driver until he had alighted stamped his 
feet upon the porch and with the lash of the 
big black whip coiled about his arm entered 
the office door. Then their heads drooped 
their eyes half closed and in a moment they 
were chewing their cuds as contentedly as if 
in their stalls three miles away. 
I vow Ruggles said the senior member 
of the firm turning from the window as he 
noted who was approaching here's Joel 
Pike! What do you suppose could have 
startled the old cuss out at this time of day he's 
coming here too. Bet you anything 
he's got another ten dollar suit for us to do 
the work in well 
he pays for it said the junior who 
was the business partner. He made the col 
lections kept the books and handled the 
cash while the other argued cases and re 
solved knotty questions of law. Together 
<pb>
they were a very efficient team. Separately 
Harmon would have been without fees and 
Ruggles without clients. 
Of course hre does answered the senior 
but who wants to fight such little picayune 
cases even if he does get paid i swear i'm 
downright ashamed of getting up in court and 
saying your honour the case of Joel Pike 
versus John Doe im sure to hear a titter 
behind me and perhaps see a broad grin on 
the bench. I believe he's had a case every 
term for twenty years and I don't believe the 
whole amount in controversy would foot up a 
thousand dollars. 
His fees would said the other significantly. 
Joel Pike isn't half a bad client 
he pays on the nail and no grumbling. 
Of course if a man will indulge in such a 
luxury as useless litigation he's got to pay 
for it. 
Then too you know he never lost a case. 
that's worth something. 
O he takes all the credit to himself. 
Well you can't deny he's entitled to a 
great deal of it i've heard you advise him 
to quit and pay up a good many times. 
he's the bane of my life exclaimed 
<pb>
pooc Joel pifce. i 
Harmon impatiently I don't see how he 
gets into so many little scrapes unless it's 
just because everybody hates and can't help 
trying to impose on him. I should think 
they'd get tired. he's as sure to strike back 
as a rattlesnake and as certain to win as if 
he played with loaded dice. Then he's as 
cold as a frog never elated and never dis 
turbed. I never saw such a miserable stingy 
contentious old bachelor in my life. You 
talk to him if he comes in. I swear I 
won't. 
He drew a great shawl about his shoulders 
for the air in the office was still frosty though 
the big wood stove was all aglow and sat 
down with his feet on the circular fender his 
stovepipe hat on the back of his head and 
his great brown eyes fixed on the ceiling. 
I took my book and dropped into a chair 
behind the stove a place I had chosen since 
the cold weather came on as both more 
comfortable and less liable to interruption 
than any other part of the office. 
O i'll manage him said Ruggles care 
lessly. He rose and sauntered towards the 
door as the driver of the oxen entered. 
<pb>
HELLO exclaimed the junior holding 
out his hand to the newcomer what's brought 
you here at this time of day? 
Thought ez I had to come to town i'd 
start early an bring the children to school 
replied the client pulling off his mitten to 
shake hands. 
I didn't know you had any children in 
affected surprise. 
No need on't said the other in his thin 
firm voice my neighbours hev enough for 
us all. 
Why don't you let them haul their own 
brats ? 
Wai some on em hain't got no team and 
some wouldn't do it ef they head. 
You must be a very pleasant neighbour 
Mr. Pike? 
Better ask them that knows about it 
answered the other significantly. But I do 
hate to see a lot of little ones wallowin' through 
such a snow as this to school an won't ef I 
104 
<pb>
can manage to happen along about the right 
time. An ox team mighty handy to haul 
youngsters with Mr. Ruggles no danger 
gettin' on an off or of bein spilled out you 
see. Mornin' squire to Harmon. 
Morning Joel replied the lawyer scarcely 
taking his eyes from the ceiling. 
Joel Pike took off his other mitten and un 
buttoned his coat. Glancing around his eyes 
fell upon me. My attention just at that 
moment was given more to him than to my 
book. 
good mornin' sir he said pleasantly 
Heerd you was readin' here glad on't. 
how're you gettin' on im 
hardly the one to ask about that I 
answered very much astonished at the recognition. 

didn't think i'd know ye eh he said 
sharply. Wai it ain't surprisin'. Joel Pike 
don't make friends with everybody. i've been 
kind o forced to look after you a little. Knew 
yer mother when she was a gal good woman 
Betsey ho'.combe good woman an thinks 
mighty well of her son too ain't no ways 
anxious bout him I find. i'm glad on't it's 
a good sign. 
<pb>
I had taught school in Joel pike's district 
the winter before but had never spoken with 
him beyond the ordinary greetings. I had no 
idea that he still remembered my existence 
and few things could have amazed me more 
than that he did so. 
See here Mr. Pike what's happened to 
you? exclaimed Ruggles jocosely winking 
at me and looking at the client whose face 
was now glowing from the effects of sudden 
heat after long exposure to cold. 
Think i'd turned preacher? was the 
quick reply with the suggestion of a 
smile. 
didn't know what had happened don't 
remember to have heard you speak quite so 
well of any one before. 
You hain't often heard me speak ill of 
anybody hev ye dont 
know that I ever did never heard 
you say much about people anyhow. 
there's not many I care to talk about 
answered the other drily. 
Well i'm glad you've taken a fancy to 
Holcombe said Ruggles. You can let him 
have your law books when he puts out his 
shingle and so give him a start. They tell 
<pb>
poor Joel pifoe 107 
me that you've got a better library than your 
counsel. 
i've got a few books said the old man 
glancing at the cases around the room as if 
comparing their contents with his own store 
but I ain't through with em yh I like to 
read em you know. And even if I don't 
read emit's a deal of company just to look 
at em specially in long winter evenin's. 
You couldn't spare them to Holcombe 
then how 
long fore he'll want em? 
About three years. 
Three years eh likely i'll not need em 
then said the man seriously. He shall hev 
em if I don't ani hope he'll make good use 
of em. He was warming his hands at the 
stove as he spoke glancing now and then at 
the senior who seemed absorbed in thought. 
He did not again look in my direction. I 
smiled at his words regarding both the books 
and his purpose to bestow them upon me as 
equally mythical. 
Not need them ? you'll never be without 
a lawsuit. But sit down Mr. Pike said 
Ruggles pushing a chair towards him sit 
down and tell me what I can do for you. 
<pb>
fioor Joel pifec. 
I want to see Squire Harmon a minute or 
two ef it's convenient answered the other 
seating himself. 
i'm afraid he can't attend to you this 
morning. he's got an important matter on 
his mind just now. 
The corners of the senior's mouth twitched 
but he kept his gaze upon the cobwebs. 
I can wait said the imperturbable 
client. 
can't I attend to your business Mr. 
Pike? asked the junior blandly. 
Not this time was the answer in a 
decided tone. I want a little law this 
mornin' i'll talk to you when I come to 
settle. 
A snort from the senior whose eyes fell at 
once from the ceiling to his client's face and 
a good-natured Bet you will! from Ruggles 
were the result of this sally. 
Joel Pike did not smile. He sat with his 
feet on the fender his whip on the floor by his 
side one elbow on his knee and both hands 
stretched out to the stove. He was looking 
straight ahead under the brim of a much 
worn hat of stiff black felt. 
When the senior had had his laugh he 
<pb>
looked at his client for a few minutes with 
amused intentness as if at a half pleas 
ing half annoying puzzle. What he saw was 
a slender man who might have been of al 
most any age from fifty upward. His features 
were small but of classic regularity his lips 
and nostrils thin a slight moustache of light 
brown a little tuft of beard upon the chin 
and just a hint of whisker under each ear. 
Elsewhere his skin had that peculiar smooth 
ness which characterises the face of a man 
of middle age who does not use the razor. 
His eyes were of a steely blue and the brows 
above them long but thin and grey. His 
hair fell to his neck behind the ears and 
when he raised his hat showed that it was 
cut square across just above the eyebrows 
in what would now be known as a bang. 
He wore a brown cloth overcoat of a style 
which had been old-fashioned in my boy 
hood. It had a cape fastened at the collar 
with a frog and had a double row of great 
brass buttons up and down the front. Around 
his neck was a string from which depended 
an enormous pair of fringed mittens that 
must have come nearly to the elbow. Inside 
of these he wore another pair of undressed 
<pb>
no poot Joel pifce. 
buckskin. His hands were small with long 
fingers and narrow filbert shaped nails. 
On the whole Pike reminded one strongly 
of the portraits of Aaron Burr. There was 
that about him which gave the idea of a man 
intellectually at variance with his surround 
ings. The quietness and evenness of his tones 
the absence of all expletives from his conversation 
and of all excitement from his manner 
served to deepen this impression. Well 
dressed he would have been pronounced a 
handsome man in any garb an observer 
would look twice at his face. He was reputed 
to be one of the richest arid unquestionably the 
stingiest and meanest man in all the country 
round. Slight as he seemed he must have 
possessed unusual physical strength for it 
was said that no one had been found able to 
work with him for a month stroke for stroke 
day in and day out. Despite the numerous 
controversies in which he had engaged few 
men had been brave enough to try conclusions 
with him physically and once had been 
enough to satisfy each of those. The stories 
told of his eccentricity were numerous some 
probably true and some quite incredible. 
People seemed to think that nothing could 
<pb>
poor Joel imfce. i11 
be too bad to say of one who made no pre 
tence of caring what was said of him. 
After a moment the senior rose threw off 
his shawl laid his hat on the top of his desk 
and sauntered to the window. His stooping 
shoulders and the pose of his shapely head 
whose black hair was just beginning to show 
signs of grey told the secret of his success 
intellectual power and an immense capacity 
for continual mental effort. That he was an 
orator full of humour and pathos was only an 
incident like his thorough legal equipment 
and a memory that never lost the impression 
of a fact. 
Ruggles resumed the conversation with the 
client paying no heed to the rebuff he had 
received. 
that's a fine yoke of cattle you have out 
there Mr. Pike. 
Every one else addressed him by his given 
name but Ruggles was young and not with 
out a touch of policy in his nature as we 
have seen. 
more'n one has made that remark afore 
Mr. Ruggles the old man answered quickly 
looking around with evident satisfaction. 
Good blood too I should say ? 
<pb>
ii poor Joel pifce. 
Pure cherry red Devons don't hev no 
others. Ef you'll find a white hair on one of 
them i'll give ye the yoke. 
What makes you so fond of Devons easy 
kept step lively and know enough 
to vote. 
Well broke I suppose broke 
i kin start them steers down the 
street let em go ez fur ez they kin hear me 
stop em turn em round an back em up to 
any door in the village without goin nigh em. 
Know any hoss team that '11 do as much no 
certainly not but I should think 
you'd keep a horse for all that just to do 
your running around with you know. 
Never owned but one hoss and never ex 
pect to own another. 
Why not no 
use for em. 
But they move so much quicker than 
oxen. 
Never see much gain in it for a farmer 
that is. 
Oxen are so infernal slow that's 
a great mistake. Such cattle as 
these move nigh about as fast as hosses at 
farm work an the same wuth of em '11 do 
<pb>
toot Joel pifce. 113 
more. Take it in haulin' logs or wood that's 
about all the farmers do in winter I keep 
three pairs of em an generally have another 
yoke comin' on. Now I take em all and go 
to the woods three sleds an only one driver 
you see put as much as any hoss team '11 
haul on each sled an start em back. A man 
can drive three yoke of cattle just as well as 
he can drive one. It '11 take a little longer 
for the oxen to make a trip but when it's 
over i've hauled three loads to the other fel 
low's one. 
But you must admit that horses beat 
them on the road well 
yes ef ye're goin' fur enough an 
not too fur an don't have too big a load. 
Ef ye're only goin' a mile or two a brisk 
stepper '11 get there while a man would be 
hitchin up a horse. And take it day in an 
day out with a load behind em the oxen 
would be apt to come out ahead. 
They say you used to drive a whole train 
of them yourself and be on the road twenty 
four hours a day? 
Yes said the old man with an absent 
smile turning toward his interrogator and 
throwing back his greatcoat that's one o 
<pb>
h4 poor Soel pifce. 
the queer things i've heerd that people tell 
about me. The fact is I head a lot o lumber 
to haul to the harbour twelve miles you know. 
Lumber was up just then but not warranted 
to stay up. There was enough on't to keep 
four hoss teams haulin' all summer. That 
meant four men to run emi found I could 
take ten or twelve ox teams an do it in less 
time with two men. that's all. 
And you didn't work em all day an all 
night too asked the other banteringly. 
Ever see anything of mine that looked as 
ef it was short o hay an corn dont 
believe I ever did now that you 
speak of it. 
Now that I speak of it i s'pose you 
never thought of it afore. Well let me tell 
you you never saw a horse nor an ox no nor 
a man either with good cover on his ribs 
that didn't hev plenty of sleep and hev it 
at night too 
So you didn't drive all night not 
exactly. You see it was this way. I 
hired a man to help me load and drive. we'd 
load the wagons in the morning drive to the 
harbour get em unloaded by dusk and be 
home before midnight. I drove the head 
<pb>
team an the hired man the hind one. We 
generally slept a great part of the way home. 
That was pretty long hours wasn't it not 
a bit. Men and cattle had plenty of 
time to rest an neither got poor at it. 
They say you just made a mint of money 
by that speculation. 
I made son.°thing of course an when it 
come to the cleanup I was lucky. The 
war had come on an cattle were in demand. 
I had quite a lot that were in good condition 
an got a good price for em. Them that 
talked bout me might hev done the same ef 
they'd worked their heads an hands harder 
and give their tongues a rest. 
You seem to think horses and women 
very much alike both unreliable. 
I don't know nothin' bout women said 
the man with a singular dignity an so pre 
fer not to discuss them. 
The tone and manner as he turned away 
from the junior partner indicated that he did 
not wish to continue the conversation. Mr. 
Ruggles wheeled around to his desk with a 
careless laugh while the senior continued to 
drum on the window as if he had heard noth 
ing that had been said. 
<pb>
JOEL PIKE gazed steadily into the open 
door of the stove as if oblivious of the other 
occupants of the room a buckskin glove in 
either hand the fringe mittens hanging down 
on either side and his black whip coiled like 
a snake on the floor beside him. With his 
face lighted up by the fire the great surtout 
thrown wide open its big collar coming up 
behind his head until the stiff brimmed felt 
hat seemed to rest upon it he seemed like a 
picture out of some quaint past which had 
missed its proper surroundings and become 
mixed up with the fashion plates of a less 
fastidious age. As I glanced at him past the 
stove I could not but be impressed as I had 
often been before with the classic regularity 
of his features the composure of his manner 
the intentness of his look and the singular 
softness and sweetness of his expression. It 
seemed quite impossible that this should be 
the Joel Pike of whom so many talked so bit 
116 
<pb>
terly but whom none seemed to know or care 
to know. 
The senior turned his head and glanced 
quizzically at the imperturbable client. Then 
he resumed his inspection of the scene with 
out and continued the monotonous tapping 
with his nail upon the window pane. 
How about the Widow Harrington Joel? 
he asked at length in a bantering tone. 
The Widow Harrington answered the 
old man with severe dignity is dead sir. 
The lawyer did not seem to note the rebuff 
though one was evidently intended. 
Are those the cattle that ran away with a 
load of your wheat and upset it over in her 
field he asked looking around and point 
ing with his thumb over his shoulder towards 
the street. 
They might be. 
You were too mad to pitch it on again 
they tell me. 
The man by the stove made no answer. 
It isn't true that you told the man who 
was working for her he might put it in the 
barn and say nothing about it still 
no answer. 
It isn't a fact that you were seen lugging 
<pb>
corn out of your own field at night and set 
ting it up in hers until the shocks stood most 
as thick as the hills had been is it the 
man moved uneasily in his chair and 
drew the collar of his greatcoat around his 
neck as if about to depart. 
They do say continued the badgering 
lawyer that her little bit of poor land raised 
the biggest crops ever known in this county 
after her husband died though it wasn't 
half tended. They even say her chickens 
laid two eggs apiece every day in the year. 
She needed em bad enough was the 
dogged answer. 
No doubt of that said the senior com 
ing back to his seat by the stove but it 
was a queer thing for you to do Joel wasn't 
it now i 
don t Know as there's any harm in 
helpin' them that needs it replied the other 
beginning to button his coat. 
And after all the widow wouldn't even 
look at him poor Joel the 
questioner's eyes shone with satisfaction 
and his face twitched with merriment. 
He was accustomed to roasting witnesses 
and could not resist the temptation to tease 
<pb>
poor Joel pike. i 
a client whose business though profitable 
was hardly creditable to one of his distinction. 
Suppose he did get angry what did 
Harmon ruggles care his patronage 
was not of as much importance as it had 
been twenty years before. The victim's 
patience was finally exhausted and there was 
a hint of fire in the steel blue eyes as he re 
plied squire 
Harmon I never had any more 
idea of marryin' the Widow Harrington 
than you had. He laid especial stress upon 
the name. 
Then what made you do such silly 
things the 
lawyer was quick to note the change 
of temper and did not care to go too far. 
Perhaps it might be I s'pose that I 
was sorry for her. She didn't seem to hev 
none too many friends anthem that 
claimed to be her friends 'peared to 've pretty 
much forgot that she was alive. 
The hit was a palpable one and the lawyer 
winced. 
Then why didn t you come out and say 
it was meant for charity instead of sneaking 
around as if you were ashamed of it ? 
<pb>
1ao poor Joel f»ifee. 
The old man turned on his questioner and 
said with reproachful emphasis squire 
you knew Susan Gedney and you 
used to claim to be her friend do you think 
she'd have taken anything from me ef she'd 
known it? 
She said she'd go to the poorhouse before 
she'd eat a crumb you had touched I be 
lieve. 
Yes and she'd have died there too if 
Joel Pike hedn't befriended her unbeknownst 
an you know it squire. 
O not so bad as that I guess answered 
the lawyer a little confused by the directness 
of the accusation. 
I never heerd of anybody else crowdin' 
favours on her did you well 
no but for you Joel Pike to do 
such things now wasn't it queer? 
it's been a good while since I came of 
age Squire Harmon said the other as he 
picked up his whip and mittens. 
And then to think it was all lost all 
wasted poor Joel Pike continued the 
lawyer regardless alike of his victim's words 
and acts. One who had waited until your 
<pb>
time of life to begin his courting deserves 
better luck eh Joel the 
man made no answer but twisted his 
whip about his arm and started towards the 
door. 
I suppose she couldn't get over the way 
you got the old place. 
That was just what was the matter squire 
said the other earnestly pausing by the door. 
It wasn't any of her fault she just didn't 
know. 
Of course and none of the money paid 
for the place being found it certainly did 
look rather strange. 
So it did said the old man candidly. 
I never blamed Susan a bit not for that 
at least. 
And your failure to produce the deed 
until his death naturally aroused her suspicion. 

But I had the deed and a receipt with a 
good witness too. 
Her husband the 
other nodded. 
He claimed to have been drunk when he 
signed it. 
He never swore to that did he ? 
<pb>
122 fcoor Joel jmfce. 
I never heard that he did and don't 
know as anybody would have believed him if 
he had. 
I do said the old man almost fiercely 
the lyin' white livered skunk id give a 
year's work to have seen him do it an then 
have heard you ask him in your very grandest 
way just to please wipe his eyes on a certain 
other paper you'd 've handed him. you'd 
've enjoyed it too squire. It would have 
been worth rememberm' by every one that 
heerd it. the 
man's vengeful glee though very quiet 
was apparent enough. 
What paper was that Joel asked the 
senior. He was not to be diverted from his 
object by the other's anger. 
No matter he knew. 
There wasn't any love lost between you 
two if 
you knew about half you think you 
do squire you wouldn't wonder. 
I don't know much was the confident 
reply but I can guess at things pretty close. 
No doubt of that squire. You can see 
into a millstone as far as the man that picks 
it no matter who he is and guess a deal 
<pb>
farther. In some cases guessin' is jest ez 
good as knowin which is the reason I sup 
pose why people generally hev more confidence 
in what they guess at than in what 
they know. 
Well how could you expect one not to 
guess the secret of such a transaction if 
you'd nothing to be ashamed of why didn't 
you come out and make a clean breast of the 
whole matter? 
There want but one person had any right 
to know about it. 
You mean Mrs. Harrington i 
mean Joshua gedney's daughter. 
Of course did you tell her she 
never asked. 
You would if she had I suppose. 
I don't know as I would squire I guess 
twas best as she shouldn't know until the 
end. 
You mean when she died the 
other made no answer. 
you're a queer man Joel. They say you 
wanted to marry the daughter after the 
mother was gone. 
I offered her a home told her if she'd 
come and live with me i'd give her the best 
<pb>
eddication to be got and leave her everything 
when I was through with it. 
You wanted a daughter then not a 
wife sarcastically. 
I wasn't particular I didn't want her to 
to go to the folks down east. 
Her father's people the 
other nodded. 
You would have married her rather than 
have that happen I suppose it 
might have been for the best said the 
other simply. 
It was a good offer and she ought to have 
accepted it with a covert sneer. I should 
like to have seen her mistress of the old place. 
Somehow I always thought Stephen gedney's 
heir ought to have it. 
So she ought so she ought said the old 
man earnestly. it's morena pity it ever 
went out of the family. 
It must have been hard for Susan con 
tinued the lawyer suggestively. He was lead 
ing his client like an unwilling witness to 
confess what he believed to have been a 
wrong. One could see the professional in 
stinct lying in wait for any lapse any weak 
place in the old man's guard. It was not 
<pb>
that he meant him any harm he would have 
scorned to take advantage of anything Joel 
might have admitted but he could not endure 
a mystery. He had tried a hundred times to 
probe this one and it irritated him that he 
could get no nearer its solution than he was 
when he began. 
It was awful said the old man looking 
down at the floor with a long sigh awful if 
i'd dreamed of half the trouble and worriment 
it would bring I it seems to me as ef 
I wouldn't 've done it squire but I would 
I know I would. There seems some things 
a man can't help doin'. 
Harrington was never any account after 
that. 
After? His voice trembled with scorn 
full emphasis. 
Well he wasn't worth much before. It 
must have been hard for Susan Gedney 
dragging out life with that drunken brute. 
A spasm of pain which was terrible in its 
intensity passed over the old man's fault 
lessly chiselled features. 
Squire he said huskily a man don't 
never know how much it costs to try to 
<pb>
smuggle up a wrong till till he's tried it 
never. 
He turned back to the stove took his 
leather mittens from his pocket held them 
to the fire a moment and then drew them on 
slowly one after the other. The firelight 
shining in his eyes gave the appearance of 
tears. He took off his mittens drew out a 
spotless handkerchief blew his nose vigour 
ously and turned again towards the door. 
He paused with his hand on the knob. 
There was a hint of something very like a 
sob in the unwonted huskiness of his voice 
as he said good mornin gentlemen. 
<pb>
THERE was something strangely irreconcilable 
between the man's language and his 
appearance between the reputation which he 
bore and the spirit he displayed as he stood 
there seemingly inclined to depart but held 
by some impulse almost against his will. 
Just as he opened the door Harmon called 
out 
What is that business you have on hand 
Joel i 
can wait said Joel looking around 
with his hand still on the knob if it's not 
convenient. 
I suppose I may as well have it over 
answered the lawyer. 
Ef it won't be troublin' ye too much 
i've had a writ served on me. 
You a writ served on you exclaimed 
the lawyer springing from his chair. Who 
ever heard of such a thing sued Joel Pike who's 
been fool enough to do it ? you've 
had a tug with most everybody in the neigh 
7 
<pb>
boorhood first and last and some outside of 
it but I never heard of anybody suing you 
before. you've always done that part of the 
job yourself. what's it for the 
junior partner and the student were 
all attention too. 
Sault an battery was the answer. 
Criminal damages 
too. 
Civil and criminal well that looks like 
business. who've you been fighting i 
thought you'd quit that business since you 
licked Harrington twenty years ago. 
I had to do that squire said the old 
man earnestly closing the door and turning 
back into the room. 
O no doubt. I expect he made some 
mighty provoking remarks to you. 
It wasn't that squire it wasn't that. I 
wouldn't have minded anything he could say 
of me but he spoke disrespectfully of of 
a woman you 
don't take up the defence of the 
whole sex do you? 
I wouldn't ever hear anybody speak ill of 
of her. 
His wife ? 
<pb>
poor Joel imfce. 129 
The other did not answer. 
Yet she hated you worse than poison. 
That jest shows how good she was she 
head to take sides with one or t'other you 
know. 
You speak as if you thought she could 
not do anything wrong. 
Twas never any secret what I thought of 
Susan Gedney squire. Whether she could 
hev done wrong ain't the matter in question 
it's certain she seldom did 'cordin' to her 
lights that is. 
you've heard I suppose that Harrington 
was in the plot to rob you. 
Never had no doubt of it. 
That was the reason he disappeared about 
that time I believe. 
can't say expect it was. 
Went into the army didn't he asked 
Ruggles who had turned from his desk and 
was listening interestedly to the conversa 
tion. 
Yes answered the senior went as a 
substitute got a thousand dollars and sent it 
all home to his wife bout the only decent 
thing I ever knew about him. I always won 
dered at that. By the way Joel did you 
<pb>
ever know there was some talk about have 
ing you up for his murder ? 
shouldn't have been surprised was the 
cool response. 
Well there was. Somehow it got out that 
there had been an attempt to rob you on 
your way home that he was in it that you 
had shot him and concealed the body some 
where. A man came to me in dead earnest 
about it and if harrington's wife hadn't re 
ceived a letter from her husband when she 
came into town to inquire about the matter 
i've a notion she'd have sworn out a warrant 
against you. 
more'n likely said the old man quietly. 
She was greatly elated over the letter and 
the check especially the letter. I think she 
was positively glad to know that.he had man 
hood enough to enlist. I remember a queer 
thing about it. She came here and showed 
the letter to me. It didn't contain a word 
about money sent but said he had gone as a 
substitute and would send her money when 
he drew his pay. The check was a cashier's 
draught payable to Susan Gedney Harrington 
with the Harrington in brackets. She called 
it to my attention and neither of us could 
<pb>
imagine any reason for it. It was lucky for 
you that it came just when it did. I don't 
know what the neighbours would have done if 
it hadn't. 
it's jest ez well they didn't do anything 
grimly. 
I don't see why people have such a spite 
against you Joel. 
I haven't ever spent much money for 
trumpets. 
To sound your own praise eh i believe 
you. Besides you've insisted on living like 
a hermit and refusing to do what society re 
quires that every one shall do who desires its 
approval. 
I head to live my own life and preferred 
to do it in my own way. 
that's a mistake Joel one must do as 
others do not as he wishes if he wants to get 
along in this world. 
I hain't anything to complain of ef the 
neighbours let me alone i'll let them alone. 
i'm satisfied ef they are. 
But they aren't satisfied they want to 
know how you came to own the old Gedney 
Place what you paid for it what became of 
the money and why you live alone instead 
<pb>
of having a wife and family like other 
folks. 
they'll have to keep on wantin' I guess. 
But you know squire that Josh Gedney 
want no fool. 
Well it would seem so but there was 
something strange about the matter for all 
that said the lawyer thoughtfully. 
Probably always will be was the com 
posed reply. 
O I suppose so retorted the other im 
patiently one might as well try to worm a 
secret out of an oyster as out of you. 
A man's got a right I b'lieve to keep 
still bout his own matters when he don't 
choose to speak. 
Well yes that's the law. Sit down and 
let me see your papers. 
The old man took off his mittens again 
unbottoned his greatcoat turned his chair 
sideways to the stove sat down on the edge 
of it removed his hat and took from it a 
thin package of papers which he handed to 
the attorney. 
The devil! exclaimed the senior glancing 
at the indorsements. Of course you 
didn't do it ? 
<pb>
'Fraid I did answered the other with a 
smile. 
You did what did you hit her with it 
was jest as she says there she wouldn't 
lie. 
With a horsewhip? 
Wai an ox whip. 
Such as that that's 
the very one. 
What on earth induced you to do such a 
thing when the girl had jilted you why 
didn't you let her alone perhaps 
I didn't like the company she 
was with. 
Suppose you didn't what was that to 
you joel Pike for a man who is credited 
with common-sense and allowed to go with 
out a guardian you are the most unmitigated 
fool I ever saw. 
I ain't payin' you to tell me that said 
the client sharply. What I want is to get 
you to appear an answer to them writs. 
You don't mean to defend why man 
alive you must be crazy. here's a young 
lady walking along the public street with a 
young man when an old fellow who has been 
persecuting her with his attentions don't 
<pb>
»34 poor Joel pifce. 
stop me that's the way it will appear on the 
trial comes up and feathers away at her 
with an ox gad even leaving welts and slashes 
on her. Why it's one of the most aggravated 
cases I ever heard of. 
What damage do you suppose she wilt 
get asked the client apparently unmoved 
by his attorney's disgust. 
I should say a thousand dollars perhaps 
more. 
The young man she was with is a hard 
case 
what's that got to do with it inter 
rupted the lawyer savagely. 
Well I wasn't goin' to hev him runnin' 
round with her anyhow decisively. 
he'll probably sue too. 
No he won't. 
Why not he's sure to recover. 
he'd lose more'n he'd gain. Fact is he 
won't be seen round here for a while at 
least. 
Well the girl will recover get a big ver 
dict. 
I don't mind the money but I do hate 
to be beat. I never thought of that. couldn't 
<pb>
poor Soel hmfce 135 
you compromise with her somehow so's to 
save a suit not 
without I had something to go on 
some reason to offer why they should drop it. 
But there is none there's neither rhyme nor 
reason in the matter. i'd have to talk to her 
counsel you know and he'll know there's no 
possible excuse for what you've done. You 
see there's a guardian ad litem in the civil 
suit so it can't be settled with the girl. 
l But I might beat em squire. 
Beat them with such a case as that joel 
Pike your luck at the law has been 
amazing 
Twenty suits and four on em been to the 
supreme court one on em twice was the 
exulting response. 
Yes it's a big record but no luck could 
stand against such a case as this. 
It would be too bad to be beat on the 
twenty-first wouldn't it the 
old man rubbed his hands together 
and gazed anxiously at his counsel. 
Well yes it would be a little tough 
laughed the lawyer. 
And by a chit of a girl too. 
<pb>
Yes the laugh would be on you de 
cidedly. 
I don't mind that but the record I 
hate awfully to have the record broke. 
But what can be done ? if 
it comes to trial i'll hev to fight. I 
don't want to but i'll jest hev to. I didn't 
think of that at the time. 
What good will it do we 
should beat em squire certain to. 
I should hate to do it but I couldn't spoil 
the record really I couldn't even for her 
sake. 
What do you propose ? 
Wai she wants to get an eddication 
squire 
Well ? 
it'll take her a long time to do it 
teachin' summers an goin' to school win 
ters 
Of course. 
Why shouldn't she take the money on a 
compromise you know jest as much as she 
needs an not feel a bit cramped go anywhere 
she chooses an git the best there 
is? 
<pb>
You seem anxious to make her a pres 
ent. 
Why not ? ain't she Joshua gedney's 
granddaughter but 
she wouldn't accept the money from 
you. 
that's jest why I want it done by a com 
promise. Let her think it's smart money 
paid to escape trial don't you see the 
old man had leaned forward eagerly 
laying a slender forefinger on the lawyer's 
arm as he spoke. 
You think after she had once used the 
money she would be bound to show some 
consideration for her benefactor eh i 
don't s'pose she'd ever know about it. 
O that won't do Joel nobody '11 believe 
that. Of course i'd be willing to help you 
but your plan won't work. you've either 
got to show Fitch he can't win or else offer a 
sum so large as to excite suspicion of your 
motive. You can't do the first and if you 
try the second the young lady will fling the 
money back in your face. it's no use and 
you deserve it too. there's no excusing 
your conduct on any grounds legal or 
moral. 
<pb>
The young student with flushed and angry 
face nodded an emphatic assent to this con 
elusion. 
The old man seemed strangely moved. At 
length he threw back his coat and opening 
his waistcoat which buttoned to the chin 
brought forth an old sheepskin pocketbock 
from which he took a paper and handed it to 
the lawyer. 
what's this her mother 
Jest before she died sir '1 said the other 
humbly. 
dear Joel ' 
Ef you please sir putting out his 
hand in remonstrance. 
But the lawyer neither saw the gesture nor 
heard the words. His eyes were flashing back 
and forth across the page. 
Why this man alive ! we've got em! 
He sprang to his feet waving the paper aloft. 
Joel you're a brick luck's with you yet! 
we'll win this case too as sure as guns does 
she know about this the girl I mean ? 
Ef you'll read a little farther you'll see 
thet thet 
He paused in embarrassment. The lawyer 
was again eagerly scanning the written page. 
<pb>
ipoor 3 oel pifce. 139 
Why this I don't understand He 
glanced at his client in wonder. 
Ef you please sir The old man 
glanced at Ruggles and myself with an im 
ploring look. 
Certainly Mr Pike said the lawyer 
answering the look rather than the words. 
Step this way please. 
He led the way into the back room of the 
office. 
Well I swear! exclaimed Ruggles. 
Did you hear that mister Pike? Think of 
it the old man too who never spoke re 
spectfully to him before in his life ! 1 believe 
they're both crazy for 
myself I was too bewildered to make 
any comment. 
From the consultation room came the 
sound of voices in earnest conversation. 
Then there was silence and we heard the 
senior pacing back and forth as was his wont 
when in deep thought. Then there was 
silence again broken only by an occasional 
murmur. Finally Mr. Harmon opening the 
door said beckoning to his partner step 
this way a minute Ruggles you 
too young man to me. 
<pb>
i poor Joel pifce. 
Gentlemen he said after we had fol 
lowed him into the other room pointing to a 
document on the table this is the last will 
and testament of Mr. Joel Pike he wishes 
you to attest it and also the codicil. 
He looked at the other who bowed with 
the grace and gravity of a courtier as he 
said ' 
Ef you please gentlemen. 
The instrument was a voluminous one and 
written in a singularly even hand except the 
codicil which was in the sprawling careless 
chirography of Mr. Harmon. Mr. Ruggles 
signed the attesting clauses both of the will 
and of the codicil. I stepped forward and 
took the pen to write my name under his. 
O I beg pardon said the senior taking 
the pen from my hand come to think you 
cannot witness this i'll have to do it myself. 

So he signed instead and Mr. Ruggles and 
I withdrew. After a while the others followed 
us out. The great lawyer accompanied his 
client to the door opening it for him and 
cordially shaking his hand as he said im 
sorry for it Mr. Pike but i've done 
you wrong great wrong. 
<pb>
it's no matter answered the old man in 
his clear voice i'm used to it. 
Yet there was a glow of satisfaction in his 
face as he spoke. The senior stood in the 
door and bade him goodbye calling out to 
him even after he reached the sidewalk ill 
attend to the matter at once Mr. 
Pike. 
His partner and the student looked on in 
undisguised wonder. Joel Pike clambered 
into his wood rack and cracked his whip. 
Gee 'baout! we heard him say. The 
sleek Devons tossed their heads turned 
nimbly into the road and started in a con 
tented trot toward home. The senior watched 
his departure from the window. 
Ruggles he said after a moment could 
you do a little job for me i 
guess so. What is it? 
If you'd just take me out in the street 
there and kick me around town for about 
half an hour i'd be obliged to you. 
Why what do you mean when 
you hear that will read you'll know. 
By the way young man he continued 
addressing himself to me do you feel like 
taking a ride ? 
<pb>
If you wish I answered. 
i've got to see Sadie Harrington before 
this matter goes any farther. 
she's in Olmstead ten miles away. 
How do you happen to know where she 
is? he asked eying me keenly. Perhaps 
my face flushed enough to betray some in 
terest in the young lady as I stated that 
I had accidentally heard of the fact. 
You know her then slightly. 

Got any sense yes 
and lots of spirit. 
I should imagine pretty of course 
you think so he added translating my con 
fusion. 
Well if you expect to settle this matter 
with old Joel Pike by paying her money you 
might as well save yourself the trip I an 
swered hotly. 
don't jump at conclusions my son he 
said good humoredly. Get the best team 
you can find and we'll be off so as to get there 
by dinner time. By the way I wish you'd 
stop in and ask Fitch if he won't step over 
here a minute. Tell him I must see him on 
a matter of importance at once. he's younger 
<pb>
poor Joel plfce. 143 
than I am and not afraid of rheumatism 
either. 
I did as directed and when I returned with 
the team found the senior ready for the drive 
Fitch saying as we started 
It all depends on the young lady if she's 
willing of course we won't stand in the way. 
I take it she's one that knows her own mind. 
knows her own mind i said to myself. 
they'll find out she does and don't allow 
any limber tongued lawyer to talk her out of 
it either! 
Of course I assumed that they were talking 
of Sadie Harrington. 
<pb>
I SHALL never forget the ride to Olmstead 
that day through the feather snow. There 
is no man so entertaining as an old lawyer 
when he gets leave of his caution to tap his 
store of reminiscences. Martin Harmon had 
practised law at Hardinsville for thirty years 
and for him every road leading into the county 
town was thronged with memories. He knew 
every man we met and every house we passed. 
Despite the cold I was sorry the end of the 
journey came so soon. 
After dinner at the hotel I walked with him 
to the house where Sadie Harrington lodged. 
She was attending school in the town preparatory 
to teaching. We had been friends from 
childhood. Her mother had lived in a small 
place cut off from the north side of the 
Gedney farm her husband a dissolute vaga 
bond who squandered all except this little 
tract and after his death she and her daughter 
would no doubt have suffered but for the 
144 
<pb>
secret benefactions of the man who owned 
her ancestral home. 
These benefactions afforded much amuse 
ment to the neighbours being regarded as in 
direct approaches to the widow though there 
were not wanting some who chose to consider 
them as offerings made by a guilty man to 
ease a troubled conscience. According to 
them and indeed by universal rumour it was 
in some mysterious but wrongful manner that 
Joel Pike had come into possession of the 
Gedney farm where he had lived since the 
death of its former owner. Joshua Gedney 
had been one of the most prosperous and 
prominent men in the country round. Joel 
Pike had worked for him when a young man 
and was much esteemed by his employer. He 
was said to have been very handsome and 
obliging devoted heart and soul to his em 
ployer's daughter Susan Gedney then a young 
girl. 
It was a matter of surprise therefore when 
Pike suddenly left gedney's service and went 
west to be among the first to reach California 
after the discovery of gold. If he brought 
any money back however no one saw it 
although report named him with the most 
<pb>
146 toot Soel pifee. 
successful of those early adventurers. He 
found his sweetheart married a fact which 
seemed to greatly disconcert him though he 
said little. 
Perhaps it was because of this that he 
remained in the neighbourhood only a short 
time. Nothing was heard of him for several 
years when on the death of Joshua Gedney 
he turned up as the owner of the whole farm 
some three hundred acres except twenty acres 
with a small house and orchard reserved for 
life to the daughter. For this he claimed to 
have paid ten thousand dollars in gold at 
that time a much larger sum than it would be 
considered now. In proof of this he showed 
not only Joshua gedney's deed but also a 
receipt for the money witnessed by the hus 
band of Susan. The deed was duly acknowledged 
by the maker. 
The mystery was what had become of the 
money harrington denied all knowledge of 
the matter and hinted that he must have been 
drunk when he signed the receipt. On the 
whole there was a general belief that in some 
way or other a fraud of the most atrocious 
character had been committed. The new 
owner would make no explanation. He told 
<pb>
his old employer's daughter she was welcome 
to occupy the premises rent free as long as 
she lived but her husband must not come 
upon them. Of course she refused. Not 
long afterwards there was a personal conflict 
between the two men. No one knew how it 
came about but Harrington was reported to 
have been terribly beaten. 
Joel Pike moved to his new farm put it in 
complete repair and stocked it with the best 
the country could afford. He seemed to 
have all the money he required but made no 
show nor could any one obtain any reliable 
knowledge as to his wealth. He hired such 
labour as he required but would allow no 
woman to enter the house where he lived 
absolutely alone. Indeed it was said no one 
had penetrated farther than the hall since his 
occupancy began. A horse which belonged 
to him when he went away he had left with 
Susan who had used it during his absence. 
When she moved from the place he re 
quested her to take the horse. On her refusal 
he shot the animal and had never used 
another. These things and many stories il 
lustrative of his eccentricity and avarice I 
<pb>
heard while teaching the public school of the 
district. 
Sadie had been one of my pupils and 
though I never heard her speak of the mat 
ter I greatly sympathised with her as a victim 
of Joel pike's fraud and indeed had come 
to entertain for her a preference not wholly 
based on pity. I did not wonder that she 
hated the miserly hermit who had wronged 
her mother so bitterly and knowing well her 
independent spirit had no doubt but that 
the senior would come out second best in the 
interview he was about to have with her. It 
was with a smile therefore that I heard his 
careless request to Come around in about 
an hour when he learned that she was in. 
I sauntered back to the hotel and waited 
fully expecting him to appear before the hour 
was up. He did not come. When I went to 
her lodging in compliance with his request I 
found them both sitting in the parlour she 
with a flushed tearful face but apparently 
on the best of terms with the lawyer. 
Well said the senior after a moment 
you two are old friends and I know will 
want a little visit. I don't suppose you 
would have seen him before you left Miss 
<pb>
Sadie if I hadn't dragged him from his books 
and made him come with me. I assure you 
he is a most devoted student. If you are to 
be absent three years i'm afraid he'll grow to 
his chair if he survives at all that is. 
The great eyes overflowed with humour as 
he made this bantering comment but the 
intimation his words conveyed was startling. 
You are going away i asked in sur 
prise. 
She will enter Mount Holyoke Seminary 
next week said the senior answering for 
her. 
Enter Mount Holyoke i 
looked at Miss Harrington who blushingly 
assented. 
What i don't understand I said 
turning from one to the other in wonder. 
I leave Miss Sadie to make the necessary 
explanations said Mr. Harmon with a 
laugh at my perplexity. Then shaking her 
hand with a paternal familiarity which was 
irritating enough to me he said goodbye 
my dear I wish you all success. You un 
derstand I hope that you can only give 
offence by being economical. 
Then he bowed himself out and I turned 
<pb>
to my companion for explanation. I con 
fess I was not prepared for what followed. 
Hardly had the door closed when she threw 
her arms about my neck rested her head 
upon my breast and began to weep. 
isn't it too bad she asked between 
her sobs. 
Now I had dreamed of having that bright 
young head in the very position it then occupied 
too often to give assent to such a dolour 
ous sentiment even when enforced by her 
tears so I answered non committally well 
I don't know. 
Poor mamma she exclaimed with a 
fresh burst of tears. I did my best to soothe 
this natural outburst of the motherless girl. 
Poor Joel Pike she continued. It 
doesn't seem as if I could go away without 
seeing him poor 
Joel Pike i repeated angrily. 
Miserable old rascal what do you want 
to see him for my 
blood was hot against the old man 
and all the hotter as I thought of his having 
beaten with stripes the lithe form my arms 
enfolded. 
Hush hush she said putting her 
<pb>
poor Joel f>ifce. 15l 
hand upon my lips. it's all a mistake a 
sad mistake. I cannot explain but I must 
see him before I go. Will you not come for 
me tomorrow and bring me back to take the 
train the next morning would 
I i do not know what answer I 
made nor what was said after that. I only 
know that when Mr. Harmon called for me 
to return with him I had promised to give all 
that my life might bring me for the privilege of 
sharing the joys and sorrows of hers and the 
sweet contract had been sealed with kisses. 
I did not tell the senior this or that I had 
agreed to take Sadie to see Joel Pike the 
next day though he teased me about her all 
the way back to Hardinsville and no doubt 
guessed half the truth. I must have been a 
dull companion for I could think of nothing 
all the way but the fair form I had embraced 
the eyes which had looked love to mine 
through their tears and of the dewy lips 
which I had kissed. 
I presume you think this has been a very 
fortunate day said the senior breaking in 
upon my reverie as we drove into the village 
just as the grey winter twilight settled over 
the snow muffled scene. 
<pb>
I supposed I must have stammered some 
sort of assent for he laughed good humour 
edly: 
Yet you do not know half the luck that 
has befallen you today nor how much you 
are indebted to me for taking you with me i 
suppose not I answered seriously. 
Whereat my master laughed long and loud 
as we drove through the street to his house. 
I heard him chuckling over it as he went up 
the steps to the door yet I could not see 
anything laughable in what I had said. 
<pb>
THE morrow brought the perfection of a 
winter day clear crisp sparkling. The 
feather snow still dulled the glare and 
though the roads were well broken the track 
was like velvet under the horses hoofs. The 
school bell was ringing for nine o'clock when 
I drove up to the gate and found Miss Sadie 
waiting for me. I wondered if she had been 
as impatient as I. In truth sleep had hardly 
visited my eyelids during the night or if it 
did the visions it brought were so full of glad 
anticipation that I could not distinguish be 
tween them and my waking thoughts. 
What pen shall describe a lover's first ride 
with his sweetheart especially on such a day! 
Never shall mine attempt it. Yet it lives in 
memory still. I have only to close my eyes 
to see the mellow light that bathed the world 
hear the soft yielding snow creak beneath the 
runners feel the warm presence by my side 
to live over again in short the rapture of that 
ecstatic hour. 
We did not go through Hardinsville as I 
153 
<pb>
*54 poor Joel fmfce. 
did not wish Mr. Harmon to see us until our 
return. So our way took us through a long 
deep canyon lined on either side with ever 
greens bowed down and decorated in all fan 
tastic ways with clinging puffs of snow. Never 
this side of the pearly gates shall my eyes 
again behold anything so beautiful as that 
snowy gorge as the horses waded along the 
unbroken track tossing aside the feathery 
particles every instant brought to light some 
new beauty. Even the little stream that ran 
bright and steaming along its rocky bed at the 
bottom of the glen was a thing of rare love 
liness. Every rock each bit of anchor ice 
and every bush along its bank were hidden 
with cushions of clinging snow. Some of the 
forms were of singular beauty while others 
were of quaint and laughable grotesqueness. 
How sweet it was to note the curious resem 
blances we found and call them to each 
other's attention and when we were climb 
ing the opposite bank how pleasant to hear 
our voices so softly echoed up and down the 
chasm while the snow upon the overhanging 
branches loosened by our laughter came 
rattling down a shower of silver spray upon 
our heads ! 
<pb>
It was just noon when we arrived at our des 
tination the old Gedney place. The spa 
cious front yard was upgrown with neglected 
evergreens upon which the snow lay in soft 
light masses undisturbed. The path to the 
front door was guarded by the interlocked 
arms of two great balsams on either side. No 
one had passed along it in a dozen years. I 
drove through the side gate to a door which 
was evidently the one most in use. A pretty 
. shepherd dog sitting on the threshold eyed us 
wonderingly retreated a few steps and then 
came crouching to my side for recognition. 
A word and a caress made him my friend. I 
tied the steaming horses to a convenient post 
and threw the blankets over them. As the 
path was not a good one between the sleigh 
and the door I lifted my companion out and 
carried her protestingly to the door step where 
I carefully set her down taking pay for my 
gallantry before I knocked for admission. 
There was no response. I knocked again. All 
was still. I stepped back and examined the 
house with care. The shutters on two of the 
windows were open the others closed. A 
light curl of smoke rose lazily from the chimney. 

<pb>
He must be in I said as I returned and 
once more rapped louder than before. 
Perhaps he will not admit us my com 
panion suggested. 
Pshaw i answered scornfully. How 
will he keep us out the 
bravest man on earth is the young 
lover in the presence of his mistress who 
speaks of imaginary danger. Nevertheless 
my heart stood still when after a moment's 
waiting the door before us swung open and 
we looked into an empty room. At the same 
time the dog at our feet set up a prolonged 
and mournful howl. As soon as we could get 
the snow light out of our eyes and realise that 
the room was really without an occupant we 
saw a door at the other side towards which 
I went walking softly for no reason that I 
could give and Sadie following me I think 
because she did not wish to remain alone. I 
knocked and we waited with beating hearts. 
There was no reply. I rapped again more 
emphatically. The dog howled once more 
while we waited for a response. 
Pshaw I said impatiently. what's the 
sense of this the man is either a boor or 
not at home. 
<pb>
I lifted the old-fashioned latch and entered 
a room warm bright and cheerful. A com 
mon country cookstove bright and clean 
stood opposite the door. A window full of 
flowering plants let in the southern sunlight. 
A big old-fashioned clock pointed both hands 
to twelve and with its solemn tick seemed 
to warn us not to break the silence. We had 
closed the door before we saw that there was 
any one within. Then I noticed the owner 
lying on a broad settle with a high back 
which at first had screened him from our 
sight. A table stood beside the stove with 
the dishes yet upon it. He had probably 
eaten lain down and fallen into a doze. 
I beg your pardon Mr. Pike I said ad 
vancing towards the couch. He did not 
speak or stir. His small white hands were 
folded on his breast and I fancied I could see 
them rise and fall with his breathing. 
Mr. Pike I repeated. 
Still he did not move. I put my hand on 
his forehead. It was cold. 
horror struck I said to my companion 
We have come too late. He is dead. 
She came to my side and looked down into 
the peaceful face. After a moment she fell 
<pb>
upon her knees kissed the cold brow and 
murmured through her tears poor 
Joel Pike mr. 
Harmon uttered the same exclamation 
when an hour afterwards I informed him of 
his client's death. Every one reiterated it 
when they learned that he had left his estate 
to Sadie Lois Gedney usually known as 
Sadie Lois Harrington. 
When finally it was revealed that the mar 
riage of Susan Gedney had been void because 
of the previous marriage of Harrington that 
her father sold his farm to prevent the expo 
sure and disgrace attaching to this fact and 
that this was the reason why Joel Pike had 
bought it people exclaimed with regretful 
emphasis Poor Joel Pike! And when it was 
known that Susan Gedney learning of these 
things on her deathbed had named Joel Pike 
as her daughter's guardian that because that 
young lady had rejected all friendly overtures 
he had planned the gentle whipping to induce 
her to accept his bounty without revealing 
her father's guilt a note of admiration mingled 
with their reference to the man who had been 
so long contemned. 
<pb>
poor 3oel pifce. '59 
People sighed in wonder of his constancy 
as they exclaimed Poor Joel Pike sadie 
foolishly thinks he was a hero but 
everybody knows that there are no heroes in 
these realistic days if indeed there ever 
were any. So he could not have been a hero 
or perhaps even a lover but just a foolish 
litigious accident whom we can only call 
Poor Joel Pike! 
<pb>
Ube rave of Uante Hngellque. 
<pb>
Ube rave of Uante Hngelique. 
i. 
THE Colonel evidently found me dull 
company for when his cigar had burned out 
he bade me goodnight and left me alone 
first informing me that any one of the ser 
vants who had gathered round and were sit 
ting on the steps of the porch would show me 
to my bedchamber. I already knew the way 
thither but after a few moments motioned 
to an old man who seemed the major domo 
of the establishment and asked him to light 
me to my room. He did so and was inclined 
to condole with me. 
Yo musn't fault Miss Elvise marse he 
said benignantly as he sat the candle down 
on the high mahogany bureau. Yo can't 
spect folks to like de Yankees alter losin' so 
much property by em. Sides dat down 
yer dey don't tine nobody a gentleman what 
163 
<pb>
164 Cbe Brave of Haute Biiflelique 
wuks wid his han's nohow. Dey do tell me 
no'th'n folks ain't dat away but yo musn't 
fault Miss Elvise kase she hain't ter blame 
fer't. hit's des de way she's ben brung up 
dat hit is. Jes' ol' so'th'n slave ways he 
stepped softly about opening the bed 
and arranging the netting as he talked. I 
was not to be drawn out by his confidential 
overtures however and when he paused only 
answered good humoredly no 
doubt you're right uncle but it 
makes little difference to me. I am here 
today and there tomorrow and if one 
person does not care for my society another 
may. At any rate I always have my own 
company which I guess is about the best 
there is. isn't that so i 
dunno bout dat sah said the old 
man chuckling standing in the doorway 
ready to bid me goodnight. Dey uster 
tell me when I was a HT chap dat dis yer 
talkin' ter onese'f mighty bad ting. Dey 
say when one axe hise'f a question de ol' 
Debbie answers. dat's what dey tell me j 
I dunno de truf Hu goodnight sah 
Hu chuckling 
to himself he went down the 
<pb>
ttbe Grave of Cante Bngelique. 165 
stairs. He evidently shared his mistress 
opinion of a man who worked with his hands 
and I realised that I had been considered a 
poor white treated with a patronising 
tolerance which said plainer than words that I 
was regarded not as an equal but as one who 
being linked by colour to the dominant race 
could not be accorded the treatment of a 
coloured labourer. Hence I had been given a 
room and all the rooms at Feuilleverte were 
spacious though none were luxurious. Mine 
was probably as good as any. It opened on 
an upper gallery draped like the lower one 
with a verdant screen of wisteria and honey 
suckle. 
After the servant left I sat down and 
thought. I had not felt so homesick since I 
left my mother. I always drove away such 
feelings with my violin. Opening my trunk 
I took it from its case tuned it drew a piece 
of resin across the bow and extinguishing 
the candle sat down in the gallery outside 
and began to play softly to myself not wish 
ing to disturb the merriment in the parlour 
below from which I had been so pointedly 
excluded. The violin had been my father's 
and bore the mark of a noted maker. It 
<pb>
would be hard to find one of purer tone or 
sweeter resonance. By and by I forgot my 
surroundings. A mocking bird flew to the 
topmost branch of a wild orange tree near 
by and balancing in the moonlight poured 
forth a challenge in a flood of melody. 
Amused at the fancy I accepted his gauge. 
After a time I became aware that the tinkling 
of the piano had ceased. I stopped 
angry at having allowed myself to be drawn 
into what must seem a bid for attention. A 
burst of applause came from the porch be 
low. I went into my room and put my violin 
in its case. As I did so there was a knock 
at the door and Uncle Isaac with the free 
dom of an old servitor entered without wait 
ing for permission. 
Misteh Miss Elvise says yo mus come 
down an play de fiddle foh de ladies an 
gentmen in de parlour he said benignantly. 
Give my respects to Miss Elvise I an 
swered coolly and say to her that I am not 
a professional musician. I play for my own 
amusement and the pleasure of my friends. 
I beg pardon for disturbing the company. I 
forgot myself and played louder than I in 
tended. 
<pb>
Cbe rave of ttante Sngelique. 167 
The negro scratched his grey earlocks in 
amazement looking on while I fastened the 
instrument in its case. I learned later that 
he reported to his mistress 
Dat no'th'n man ain't no common trash 
Miss Elvise. What yo 'spose he say when I 
tol him he was ter come down an play he 
jes tun roun' an say ez fine ez yo please 
Gib my respecto de Missis an tell her I 
ain't no purfessnal player. Sorry to sturb 
de company I done fergot whar I was. I 
neveh play cept foh my own amusement an 
to pleasure my frien's.' 
Did anyone ever hear such impudence! 
exclaimed the young lady. And he's just a 
common labourer. 
Dat he ain't Miss Elvise protested the 
old man. he's a gentleman else yo Uncle 
Isaac nebbeh see one an he ain't been 
house boy in dis yer mansion come sixty years 
nex chris'mus widout seein' a few young 
buck in his day there 
was a consultation. As its outcome 
some one came racing up the stairs and 
sounded a quick but gentle knock on my 
door. Opening it I saw a slender lad all in 
white save a blue tie that lay in careless 
<pb>
168 Cbe Grave of Slante Sngelique. 
abandon over his shirt front. Long black 
hair fell behind his ears as he said with a 
bow 
Mistaire Robbins I has ze honour to in 
troduce myself Gabriel Henri Monfort of 
Grisombois at your service ze guest of ma 
cousine Miss Elvise Amis zis evening I has 
ze gran plaisir to hear your wonderful your 
ravissant performance on ze violin. Truly 
monsieur nevaire did I hear such tendresse 
such art nevaire i has been commission 
to ask ani esteem it an honour to do so 
Will you not enchant us again will you not 
gif me ze great joy to introduce you to my 
friends ze friends of ma belle cousine I 
should say who wish to count zemselves 
your friends also it 
is impossible to give the courtesy with 
which he spoke this graceful amende each 
word of which was an apology yet none re 
quiring recognition as such and extended to 
me both his hands which I no doubt clasped 
with unexpected warmth for just at that 
moment a little genuine consideration seemed 
to me to be about the most precious thing in 
the world. 
Ah I knew you would come he cried 
<pb>
Cbe Crave of ttante Sngellaue. 169 
with a charming boyish frankness. When I 
hear you play I say to myself moi only a 
gentleman play like zat Now I say so 
again though I could not be more sure. 
When ze company has ze much desire to hear 
again I say i will go ask him he will not 
refuse Gabriel Henri so I has ze honour 
n'est ce pas monsieur to be your firs friend 
in ze parish i assured him he was cor 
rect. 
Ah then I be your las one too. Always 
we shall be friends now yes we 
shook hands again. There seemed to 
be a bright moisture in his eyes and I was 
glad the light was at my back. It was a queer 
plight of friendship but it stands to this day. 
The first man to whom I wire my good news 
or would call to me in misfortune is Gabriel 
Henri. 
He wanted to carry my violin but I would 
not permit not knowing what might happen. 
So he seized the bow and holding it like a 
wand of office marshalled me down to the 
parlour where he introduced me as his var 
dear friend. 
Well I played. They listened danced 
sung. Sometimes Miss Elvise accompanied 
<pb>
Cbe rave of ttante 
me on the piano. Wine and cake and fruit 
were pressed upon me with all cordiality and 
Gabriel Henri scarcely left my side. It was 
late when the company broke up with sweet 
est words and smiles some riding away and 
others remaining. And I I had never had 
such an evening in my life. I was almost 
delirious with joy. I was in love in love for 
the first and last time in my life in love 
with Elvise Theronde niece of Colonel 
Archie Dinsmere the richest of planters and 
most exclusive of aristocrats. 
<pb>
ii 
You see it all came about in this way. 
When the war ended I was eighteen years 
old. My father having enlisted as a private 
had risen to the rank of colonel and been 
killed in one of the last battles about Peters 
burg. We were just plain people living in a 
little New England village father was a 
stonecutter and I had followed the trade 
after leaving the public school working away 
after his death as he would have wished me 
to. With his back pay a pension and a small 
life insurance policy in the Berkshire Mutual 
which my mother had nearly starved herself 
to keep alive we were really better off than 
we had ever been before. Then a spirit of 
unrest got hold of me the desire to go some 
where and see something which is always 
luring the American to new environments. I 
had mastered my craft I suppose it was half 
inherited or picked up as a child playing 
about the shop. I was especially deft at let 
tering and fine ornamental work but as for 
171 
<pb>
Cbe Brave of ttante Sngelique. 
that there was no workman in the country 
round superior in quality or quantity of work 
to Egbert Robbins stone cutter of Sudham 
Massachusetts. 
I wanted to see the ground where the war 
had been fought or thought I did before 
all traces of it disappeared. It happened 
that about this time my boss patented a sort 
of composition tombstone which was a great 
deal cheaper than real stone looked as well 
and in most cases would last quite as long. 
When he learned that I was bound to take a 
trip South it struck him that I might intro 
duce his novelty with profit since nothing 
had been done in the monument line in that 
section for a number of years although people 
had kept on dying at even more than the 
usual rate. So having obtained my mother's 
reluctant consent I started off with a trunk 
and a big ironbound box containing tools 
working clothes samples and specifications 
prepared alike to take orders do job work or 
open a shop as circumstances might decide. 
Well everything turned out favourably. I 
started in the fall by the next autumn I had 
worked the coast States pretty thoroughly 
gone over all the battle fields started agents 
<pb>
Brave of ttante Bngelique. 173 
for the stone in almost every town I was to 
have a percentage on their orders for a certain 
number of years and was as happy in 
the roving life as a youngster could be and 
that is about the limit of human bliss. But 
my desire for wandering had not been ap 
peased and as it was not thought best to 
extend the monument business farther I con 
eluded to take a cross country trip on my own 
hook through Alabama and Mississippi to 
Louisiana a State which for some reason 
had always had a great fascination for my 
imagination. 
I had learned by that time that a right 
good thing might be done in cleaning and 
polishing up the old stones in the family 
cemeteries on the plantations where nearly 
all the people of any account were buried. 
So I bought a good stout cracky wagon 
with a top over the seat and a span of horses 
put in such tools and materials as I was likely 
to need my trunk and a box of letter stencils 
hired a reliable coloured man and started out. 
Did it pay strangely enough I had 
struck a fat thing. I only wished I had ten 
hands and every week thirty days. I did 
contemplate importing an assistant or two 
<pb>
i74 ttbe rave of ttante Sngelique. 
but I knew if I hired a smart Yankee jour 
neyman to come down the probability was 
that his mouth would get him into trouble 
before the week was out. In a little Alabama 
town I picked up a coloured man about my 
own age who had been a plantation carpenter 
had a general knowledge of tools and as 
it turned out a good eye for form. He helped 
me scrape and scour while the man who 
drove the horses brought water sifted sand 
and lent a hand in setting up fallen stones. 
In this way I got through a great deal of 
work and having no scruples about charging 
made money hand over fist as they say. 
But I found that the less I made of myself 
and the duller I seemed the more pleasantly 
I was treated and the more business came to 
me. So not presuming to be the equal of 
those who employed me I smothered all my 
Northern ideas and professed an indifference 
I was far from feeling as to the reconstruction 
controversies that were raging around 
me. Whenever I struck a town where there 
was an express office I sent what money I 
could spare to a bank at home though some 
times strongly tempted to speculate. As we 
did not remain in one place long no one 
<pb>
ttbe rave of Saute angelique. 175 
looked on me as doing an especially lucrative 
business only George my assistant realised 
it and as I had opened an account for him at 
my home bank he never peached. 
A few times I was in closer places than I 
cared to be though I made it a point to keep 
out of adventures but the letters of recommendation 
I asked of every man I worked 
for allowed me to account for myself to 
everybody's satisfaction in encounters with 
night prowling gentry which were a mutual 
surprise. Nothing really happened until in 
May of the second year I reached Feuille 
verte one of the largest cotton plantations in 
Louisiana and cotton was still king in the 
world of finance though the fancy prices of 
the first two years of peace no longer ruled. 
The owner of Feuilleverte was Colonel 
Archibald Dinsmere a man just turned sixty 
who had lost an arm at Shiloh had there 
upon returned to his estate and devoted himself 
to its working and with good reason. 
It was said that with shrewd foresight he had 
sold his slaves bank stock and other securities 
early in the war and invested the proceeds in 
land for attached as he was to the cause of 
the Confederacy he was still more alive to 
<pb>
17 6 Cbe raw of ttante Bngelique. 
the opportunity for profit which the times 
afforded. Though he came of good stock 
the Dinsmeres of Virginia reaching back to 
an English family of note his branch of it 
had at one time been employes of their rich 
er kinsmen so neighbourhood gossip somewhat 
illnaturedly put it that Colonel Dinsmere 
was only two removes from an overseer. 
While this did not debar him from any 
social privilege it hurt his pride and spurred 
him to become the wealthiest man of his 
region and inherited thrift and capacity for 
management promised that he would be 
successful in his ambition and gather an 
estate which would permit his son and only 
child at that time studying in a German 
university to pursue a public career of such 
scope as would more than prove the family 
pretensions. 
As might be expected Colonel Dinsmere was 
rumoured to be a hard man to deal with and 
as we pushed through the tangled luxuriance 
of vegetation in the family burying ground 
I somewhat ostentatiously jotted down his 
directions in regard to every bit of work to 
be done. There were many stones to be re 
burnished and many new names to be cut on 
<pb>
ttbe Stave of ttante Sngelique. '77 
moss grown slabs. Unfortunately my coloured 
helper George was threatened with a fever 
the very day after our arrival and lest everything 
devolve on me alone I gave up the 
carryall to the sick man and set the teamster 
to wait on him intending to make a little 
camp for myself by a spring which burst out 
under the live oaks near the cemetery. But 
at this juncture somewhat to my surprise 
after all I had heard of him my employer 
insisted on making me his guest and would 
not take no for an answer. I generally occupied 
the tent that was part of the wagon 
lading while the coloured boys slept on the 
ground under the vehicle. We carried cook 
ing utensils and supplies and were wholly in 
dependent of the people for whom I worked. 
Now and then however I had passed a night 
with them and was usually invited to dine 
once or twice. These were invariably pleasant 
occasions and so though surprised I accepted 
Colonel dinsmere's hospitality without mis 
givings. 
And that first evening I sat with my host 
on the piazza. Among the inmates of the 
great straggling mansion was a young lady 
hardly more than a child who at first treated 
<pb>
178 abe rave of ttante angelique. 
me with indifference if not contumely. There 
was a new piano in the parlour which might 
have been the audience room of a palace for 
size and she apparently expected to impress 
me not only with the magnificence of the in 
strument but with her skill upon it when 
after dinner she sat down and played for an 
hour without intermission. I complimented 
her technique but my host merely said it was 
well enough for her years. The piano was a 
gift from his son he said the young lady 
was his niece and an orphan and he being 
a widower mistress of Feuilleverte. He left 
the impression that she was dependent on his 
bounty. 
In the course of the evening two or three 
ladies and several young men came in and 
there was music and merriment in the parlour 
outside of which we sat in the light streaming 
from its long windows. Some of the gentle 
men stepped out to speak to the Colonel. 
He introduced me and they addressed me 
politely. 
But 1 was not invited in. Somehow it stung 
me. As a man who gained a livelihood by his 
own hands I had.gotten used to a good many 
things since I left home but never before 
<pb>
ttbe rave of Cante Snflelique. 179 
had I with apparent purpose been excluded 
from the social life of the house where I was 
a guest. And I was irritated that it should 
annoy me knowing as I did the people and 
their habits of thought. But I was young 
and perhaps a little vain of my own accomplishments. 
My father had always bewailed 
the lack of early musical training in himself 
and had seen to it that I should not also 
suffer. 
It was little wonder I longed for the 
pleasant things which dreams bring to all 
young men. The house was most romantic 
a great rambling structure in the midst of 
vegetation bewildering in its lush variety. 
The galleries above and below were shut in 
by gnarled vines from which hung the soft 
tinted racemes of wisteria and over which 
floated the delicate pungence of honeysuckle. 
Beyond the shadows of mighty moss laden 
oaks fell on a trackless maze of shrub and 
flower moonlight and glamour. 
<pb>
iii 
THE mocking birds woke me early on the 
morning of the third day of my stay at 
Feuilleverte. I lay awake nursing the sweet 
pain of a love that was hopeless for by this 
time I had learned that Elvise was the 
destined wife of James Dinsmere far away 
in the Rhineland. And that I an obscure 
boy should ever have dreamed of wooing the 
houri of this paradise true 
I had made a good beginning toward 
occupying a more conspicuous position in 
society than I then adorned. In the Berk 
shire bank was deposited to my credit ten 
thousand dollars. That is what I had coined 
the days of two happy years into. A few 
more thousands would make me rich accord 
ing to my notions though hardly more than 
a beggar in the consideration of Colonel 
Dinsmere to whom only broad acres swarm 
ing with labourers represented respect not 
wealth merely but power almost nobility. 
But the old planter aristocracy was doomed 
180 
<pb>
rave of Cante Sngelique. 
now that ownership of those who worked 
was no longer permitted. And then prejudice 
alone would have put an insurmountable 
barrier between Elvise Theronde and 
any Northern suitor for to Colonel Dinsmere 
the Yankee was well not an admirable 
being though his despite was based not so 
much on hatred as on disgust at some mon 
strolls thing he fancied they were like. 
But I was full of life and hope and re 
membered that youth and strength and ardour 
and above all opportunity were advantages 
not to be despised in the lists of love. By 
the time the sun was up I was ready to win 
the sweetheart of my life in spite of all to 
carry her away if I had to fight for her which 
was not unlikely. I always had a hot im 
pulsive spirit accustomed to go straight at 
things without estimating chances. I felt 
that the time had come to throw aside con 
ventionalities and risk desperate measures 
and this all the more because music brings 
kindred natures together very quickly and I 
had fancied as we played Chopin the night 
before alone in the great parlour that there was 
ar inclination in my favour. 
I had stipulated that I should have break 
<pb>
182 Cbe rave of Cante Bngelique. 
fast early in order to work in the cool of the 
morning and so far had not had the company 
of any of the family at my matutinal meal. 
The dew was dripping from the shining 
honeysuckle leaves as I went down the out 
side stairs in the cool shadows of the vines. 
Passing through the parlour on my way to the 
diningroom a white shape came toward me 
in the dimness and Elvise a rose at her 
throat held out her hand in frank greeting. 
I was almost afraid I should be too late 
to breakfast with you it is so very early and 
every one else is asleep she whispered. I 
took her hand and saw the red flame in her 
face as she dropped her eyes before mine. 
Then I took her in my arms and kissed her 
and knew by her sighs that the toss was won 
the battle this time to the swift. 
What will Uncle say she said glancing 
around in affright when she drew herself 
away pale and surrendered. 
No matter I replied hotly. What do 
you say do 
you need to ask she said soberly. 
I did not. 
It was a quick courtship. We went out to 
breakfast together troth plighted. Only my 
<pb>
ttbe rave of ttante Sngelique. 183 
sweetheart's shining eyes and an inclination 
to blush when she caught my glance told of 
the episode destined to change the course of 
our lives. Day was bright when the meal 
ended and I hurried away to my work. 
I don't know what made me do it. I have 
never been a religious man but a feeling of 
awed reverence came over me when I had 
left her and had time to realise what it all 
meant to me. In a nook in the old cemetery 
where drooping evergreens shut out the world 
I instinctively dropped to my knees beside 
an old box grave in humble grateful prayer. 
When I brushed the mist from my eyes I 
saw the slab beside me was covered with 
periwinkle the dark leaves starred with 
amethystine flowers. Around the inscription 
the vine had been cut away in a circle so the 
name seemed set in a frame the marble 
showing wonderfully pure and the lettering 
executed with taste and skill. I felt that it 
had had a woman's care and there being 
only one woman in the world for me then I 
thought of her. No other grave in the bury 
ing ground showed her tender hand could 
it be that the mother of Elvise lay here the 
date of death corresponded with what I 
<pb>
l84 abe rave of aante bngeuque. 
judged to be her age. But though Elvise 
was Elvise Theronde and the name here 
read ang^lique Dinsmere I felt sure that 
unwittingly by the same guiding hand that 
had led my wandering footsteps to Louisiana 
I had come to sob out my joy on her dead 
mother's breast. 
<pb>
iv 
I was whistling merrily as I always did 
when at work. It was perhaps ten o'clock 
and the sun was beating down on the stone I 
was recutting when a shadow fell across it 
and looking up I found Colonel Dinsmere 
standing beside me with a white umbrella in 
his hand. 
Do you find whistling necessary to your 
your occupation he asked with a hesi 
tancy which gave it the effect of a sneer. 
It serves for company when one is 
alone I answered cheerfully. Laying down 
my mallet I drew off my gloves and wiped my 
sweaty face. He watched me intently. 
And do labourers at the North always 
wear gloves while at work not 
always I replied. It is customary 
in our trade though to keep the 
hands from being cut by the chips. 
And keep them soft and white like a 
gentleman's he added. 
Exactly. We don't consider work dis 
creditable you know. 
185 
<pb>
so i presume you are considered a 
gentleman T when at home then? 
I looked up but saw by the kindly smile 
on his face that the remark held no ulterior 
intent and swallowing my wrath answered i. 
hope I carry myself as one wherever I 
am. 
that's right he said approvingly. And 
your father what was his trade o 
he held a mallet until he took up a 
sword. It was the first time since I left 
home that I had referred to my father's par 
ticipation in the war. 
A soldier was he you speak of a 
sword. Am I to understand he was an of 
ficer? 
He was a colonel when he fell at Five 
Forks I answered sharply. 
Think of it mused my host. A stone 
cutter and a colonel! Well you Yankees 
are queer people and you had a queer army. 
They seem to have served for the work 
in hand pretty well. 
So they did no doubt about that and 
no offence intended. I was only trying to 
realise a state of society in which there are 
no gentlemen no distinction between the 
<pb>
ttbe Crave of ttante Sngelique. 187 
man of leisure and the workingman between 
the brain that directs and the hand that 
executes. I suppose we shall have to come 
to it down here too some time. James my 
son says there's no doubt about it but I say 
the man who tills the soil will never be the 
equal of the one who owns it. Hum I sup 
pose men in your business command pretty 
fair wages salaries I mean. 
From four to ten dollars a day now I 
said. 
Indeed I had no idea it was so much. 
Then your father must have left you quite an 
estate. 
Though at a loss for the motive of this cat 
echism and not at ease under it I made no 
mistake when I took refuge behind a favourite 
Southern locution and replied with a smile 
and a shrug Just tolerable sir. We are not 
exactly objects of charity. 
I should think not he said laughing. 
At the rate of compensation you are to re 
ceive for work which you say will occupy you 
two weeks and mind I make no objection 
to it you will soon have an independent 
fortune. 
The sooner the better 
<pb>
Of course and what then more stonecutting 
i 
put down my mallet and faced my inquisitor. 
Colonel Dinsmere I am doing your 
work now by day's jobs. Twenty years from 
now I shall be the governor of a State or a 
member of the United States Senate. 
You will well stranger things have 
happened. I believe you will hope you will 
i'm sure he said pleasantly though evidently 
much amused. And by the way the young 
people have had a good deal to say about 
your performance on the violin and my niece 
wishes to invite some friends in tonight to 
enjoy the pleasure of hearing you. I told her 
to go on and ask them but she said you 
might not like it. I quite understand. An 
artist has a right to say when he will exhibit. 
I used to be a violinist myself and trust you 
will grant her request if only for my own 
sake. I enjoyed your music last night very 
much. Here is the note she sent. 
He handed me a sealed envelope and 
turned away while I read. Without guessing 
its character he had brought me my first love 
letter. 
Certainly I answered glancing over it. 
<pb>
Anything Miss Elvise may command I shall 
be happy to do if I can. With your permis 
sion sir I will answer this. The Colonel 
nodded. I took the portfolio that was lying 
with my coat in the shade of a bush opened 
it on the slab where I had been working and 
wrote a formal reply handing the note to the 
Colonel unsealed. I knew she would under 
stand. Being a little vain of my handwriting 
also I was pleased to see my employer glance 
at the superscription. 
Queer people queer people he repeated 
thoughtfully. Artist and artisan gentleman 
and workman all in one. Pardon me but I 
don't understand how the artist part of you 
can descend to can endure the rough 
labour. 
Oh money makes the mare go I said 
lightly and a little vulgarly. 
So that is your motto is it you would 
do anything for money well 
yes I suppose so I answered. 
Anything in my line that is. 
And your line is gravestones 
making and setting new 
ones and repairing old ones. 
you'd better add whistling. 
<pb>
Cbe Brave of Cante Bngelique. 
that's so I said laughing. I guess I 
do as much of that as anything. 
Then you will never succeed said the 
Colonel with great earnestness. The 
whistler is always a dreamer not thinking 
of what he is doing but of what he would 
like to do. You can't trust them not that 
they are deceitful but they lack self control 
are sure to be indiscreet about their own 
affairs and other people's too if they have 
a chance. 
Thank you Colonel Dinsmere I shall 
never whistle again i said mockingly. I 
had been setting up a little awning to screen 
my work from the sun but now I let the rope 
slip and laughed until the tears came. It 
seemed so funny for me to be receiving lessons 
on holding my tongue and above all from 
Colonel Archibald Dinsmere whose niece's 
heart I had stolen under his very nose he 
stared at me a moment in amazement then 
stumped off in high dudgeon. Half an hour 
afterward I was surprised to see the shadow 
of his umbrella fall again on the white glare 
that lay outside the shade of my awning. 
See here Mr. Robbins d'ycm know your 
boy down there in the wagon is pretty sick ? 
<pb>
Have you any idea what's the matter with 
him only 
a bilious attack I think. I found 
him a little light headed this morning but his 
temperature was better. I don't think it's 
anything serious. 
It may not be but I don't like to have 
sick niggers nor glandered horses around my 
premises. The tone was not that of my 
gently quizzical host of a few moments be 
fore. It was the grandson of the overseer 
who spoke and I took satisfaction in noting 
it though I said in the mildest of voices i 
really don't think you need be alarmed. 
One can never tell he rejoined ex 
citedly. i've had cholera and yellow fever 
and smallpox among my people at one time 
and another and none of them seemed anything 
serious at first but each one cost me a 
year's crop before it was over yellow fever 
drives off the white folks and the others kill 
the hands and when a planter loses a crop 
it means something no matter how rich he 
may be. 
Well what can be done i asked. 
I don't care what so long as you take 
him away from here. You might send the 
<pb>
192 ttbe rave of ttante Bngelique. 
other boy over to Tchitoulas with him to 
stay until he either gets well or dies. 
But the man is in my employ came with 
me at my solicitation. I shouldn't feel justi 
fied in deserting him like that but i'll have 
a doctor and if he says the disease is con 
tagious will take him away at once of 
course. 
I don't care whether it's contagious or 
not. i'm not going to have any strange niggers 
sick on my place i 
neither knew nor cared what george's 
illness was but the colonel's manner riled 
me coming as it did on top of other things. 
I got up and began to collect my tools say 
ing very well sir. I will remove him 
from your premises at once. 
What do you mean asked the Colonel 
bluntly. 
I mean that you can get some one else to 
do your work. I am going to see that the 
man who served me faithfully in health has 
decent care when he is sick. 
Colonel Dinsmere looked at me a moment. 
Do you mean to say he asked that you 
will give up a profitable job like this for a 
<pb>
sick hired hand is that your usual rule of 
conduct i 
don't know that it is but it's the one I 
choose to adopt in this instance. The man 
is hundreds of miles from home and i'll treat 
him fairly black or white. 
Well well said Colonel Dinsmere with 
unexpected mildness I suppose it must be 
all set down to the peculiar formation of the 
Yankee mind. However since you insist on 
his staying here I will simply spread the re 
port that he has the smallpox. That will 
keep every one away white or black. So if 
you have a lonely time until he begins to 
mend don't blame me. I can't run any risks 
during the planting season you know. 
I am to go on with the job then i 
said stiffly. 
Oh dear yes. Say do you know you 
are as hot tempered as a Creole. I always 
thought Northern people were cold-blooded 
and all that. 
His affability was wasted. 
If you will kindly have my trunk sent 
down from the house I began. 
Pardieu and what would become of 
our music if I did we must take the risk 
<pb>
194 ttbe Brave of aante Sngeiique. 
with a shrug and a smile. But you needn't 
worry about your man. i'll send Dr. Trerri 
hardt around. It is just as well that the 
hands should not feel free to visit your camp 
anyway and this report will keep them away. 
I suppose you must find visitors unprofitable 
sometimes his 
fear of contagion had evidently been 
a farce but the reason why he did not wish 
visitors at the cemetery was not so plain. 
Being no affair of mine however I answered yes 
indeed and a bit annoying too. 
So I should imagine. Well i'll come and 
see you occasionally but I shall impress on 
Elvise and her friends that it will not do for 
them. 
I started. Did he suspect our attachment 
though so new and sudden or was he merely 
acting on general principles by the way 
he added suddenly there's something here 
I forgot to mention the other day a very 
stupid mistake of the man who cut the stone. 
i'd like it corrected. 
1 followed while he led the way to the 
cedar sheltered nook already sacred to me 
where the grave of Angelique Dinsmere lay 
among the periwinkle. 
<pb>
Cbe rave of Uante Sngeligue. 195 
There he said placing his cane on the 
inscription can you change those letters 
or figures rather without noticeably altering 
the effect? 
Certainly but it would take a good deal 
of work. The letters are raised you see the 
stone being cut away around them. I should 
have to deepen the whole indentation. I 
pulled away the vines as I spoke and felt the 
thickness of the marble. 
What would it cost just 
as much as a new stone except the 
value of the slab itself. 
And that would be well 
since it is in with all the other work 
I should be willing to do it for twenty-five 
dollars. 
Hum that seems like a pretty big price 
for a whim. But I always have been annoyed 
by it. The stone was put in place during my 
absence or it would have been corrected then. 
It may seem a small matter but mistakes are 
out of place on mural tablets especially in a 
family burying ground. don't you think so he 
stooped down and pushed aside the vine 
saying it's all right except this figure 
pointing to the date of death March 29th 
<pb>
i96 Cbe Brave of ttante Sngelkjue. 
1853 This 9 should be a 7 The party 
died at sea and there was for some time a 
doubt as to the exact date. However the 
man who cut it had it correctly from 
me. 
He probably read it wrong. Sevens and 
nines are often written very much alike I 
suggested carelessly. 
That may be. But he made a very 
annoying blunder. I should like you to rectify 
it in such a manner as to attract as little 
attention as possible. Nothing that might 
suggest a change you know er the feelings 
of the relatives 
Certainly. I will guarantee that in three 
days no one would know a chisel had touched 
it. Even the vines shall be in place. 
Good. In three days then. If you are 
successful I would not mind doubling your 
price. 
But I must be wholly undisturbed. 
i'll attend to that. 
But you you will want to see the work 
as it progresses i 
that is the last thing I should wish. 
Well today is Thursday on Saturday 
then you may come. 
<pb>
I go to New Orleans tomorrow and do 
not return until Monday. Will that do i 
assented. He bowed turned away and 
was soon lost in the evergreen aisles. I waited 
until he had disappeared then sat down to 
think. That his purpose in making the change 
of date was an unlawful one I was satisfied 
and I had a suspicion that it might be a 
criminal offence to tamper with records of the 
kind. What evidence could I show that any 
such directions had been given me. Colonel 
dinsmere's reputation was that of a very 
shrewd man. I was a stranger surely it 
could not be that he had learned my love for 
his niece and was taking this method of dis 
gracing me! 
And ang6lique Dinsmere the date of whose 
decease I was to alter what difference could 
two days make to either the living or the dead 
after the lapse of sixteen years sixteen 
years the age of my Elvise. My Elvise yes 
and no barrier of crime should come 
between us. What could I do whom 
might I consult then I remembered one 
who had plighted me his friendship. I be 
lieved he might be trusted. Indeed I realised 
that I must trust him when through an open 
<pb>
ing in the cedars I saw Gabriel Henri Monfort 
strolling among the tangled grasses beyond. 
Going to the hedge I bade him good morning. 
So zis is ze bowaire where ze artist 
artisan seclude himself he chattered viva 
ciously glancing around the little nook as he 
entered. Truly our Tante Angelique would 
be flattered by ze choice. Ah ze pauvre 
tante she has not even a grave only make 
believe. But we keep it for her. Ma belle 
cousine she come here to keep green ze 
flower where she did wish to be laid. For 
our tante did select zis spot she did has ze 
trees planted ze cedar ze magnolia ze willow 
now grown so great all all she did choose 
before she go away. But Elvise did bring ze 
vine is it not beautiful but 
I forget myself! Ma cousine she 
did tell me did charge me ver se'rieusement 
to bring you her love. Her love what think 
you of that an Gabriel Henri her cousin 
he has languish all his life for it. Ah you 
blush. You has need. You are a thief a 
Northern robbaire you come steal our 
sweet rose with a glance a word eh bien 
she has giv' Gabriel Henri smiles and kisses 
always but no love. I congratulate you mon 
<pb>
rave of ttante Sngelique. 199 
ami as I has already congratulate her. Ze 
brave deserve ze fair an you are brave ma 
foi brave an swift! 
He flung himself beside me on the stone 
and threw both arms around my neck em 
bracing me in ecstasy. Ani love you too 
mon brave though if she had not tell me 
herself Elvise ah how I hate you I keel 
you an now to fin you in her bowaire ze 
shrine of her saint ze grave of our Tante 
Angelique whom she did never see but who 
was to her ze fairie godmother. If la belle 
Elvise had been born one two days later all 
Tante angelique's money all ze estate go to 
ze Colonel to ze mizaire ze man who think 
only to get more lan more money more 
power to has his will always. An he say 
Elvise shall marry his son zat ze estate be 
doubled an James become ze great man and 
James i asked in some trepida 
tion as he paused for breath. 
Ah James he is wise. He say nozzing! 
He does not care for ze money but he love 
ah how he love ze politic. He mean to be 
gouverneur president everything. An ma 
foi he will be. But he get not la belle 
Elvise eh my Viking and Gabriel Henri 
<pb>
laughed until the tears rolled down his olive 
cheeks. He come he see he conquaire i 
mus write a sonnet zis very day entitle 
ze Taking of Elvise.' You thief of hearts 
I shall help you carry her away from ze 
Colonel to steal ze fairie princess from ze 
dragon you 
did not know your Elvise was an 
heiress you say no but ze heart speak to 
heart an both did hear ah Elvise keep no 
secret from Gabriel 
The dear fellow chatted on but I held 
the key to the mystery. The inscription as 
amended made Colonel Dinsmere heir to the 
estate of his dead sister. I told Gabriel 
Henri of the design and how I should frustrate 
it by simply turning the slab over and 
duplicating the inscription all but the desired 
alteration on the other side. Then if necessary 
the stone would prove its own refutation. 
To this he enthusiastically assented 
and it was carried into effect save that on the 
edge where the vines lay thickest I cut in 
tiny letters a statement of the changed date 
by whom ordered and by whom executed. 
<pb>
v 
It was a gay party at Feuilleverte that 
night. Every one seemed to share my joyousness. 
My host who I found was no mean 
violinist himself lauded my execution in ex 
travagant terms and frequently and emphatically 
deplored the imperative affairs which 
demanded his departure for New Orleans the 
very next day. He hoped to soon return 
but business was a strange tyrant asking a 
week and taking a month. No doubt we 
would have merry times in his absence but 
they must all remember I had not their 
leisure and be careful not to trouble me at 
my work besides one of my men was ill 
and while he trusted it was nothing con 
tagious he had begged me to use great care 
it might be nothing serious but and a great 
deal more to the same effect. 
The colonel's anticipations as to our gaiety 
were fully realised. I was surprised at first 
that he flowed me such an opportunity for 
291 
<pb>
202 ttbe Brave of Cante Sngelique. 
unlimited intercourse with his niece but to 
his apprehension the distance between us 
socially was so great that he would as soon 
have conceived her giving a thought to a 
servant in his employ as to a stone cutter. 
The same feeling was apparent on the part of 
their friends. They liked me enjoyed my 
musical gifts and treated me with consideration 
but not with that candour and familiarity 
which argues equality. All but Gabriel 
Henri and what a friend he was his de 
votion made up for the shortcomings of a 
thousand others. 
I enjoyed the days best. My sweetheart's 
morning rides were sure to end in the burying 
ground and one has to be careful where the 
chips fly when such company is about. Elvise 
and Gabriel Henri spent many a day with me 
under the cedars and to have seen the latter 
one would have thought the versatile fellow 
intent on learning the stone cutter trade. 
Before Colonel dinsrnere's return our plans 
for the future were laid. It would be almost 
five years before Elvise became of age. I de 
cided to do no more cemetery work than was 
promised but begin the study of law. I had 
avowed myself ambitious of honour as well as 
<pb>
wealth in my conversation with her guardian 
but it was more to enjoy his surprise than 
from any actual aspirations of the sort. Now 
the idea of being entrusted with her future 
revealed to me clearly enough that years of 
solid preparation would be required before I 
could make good the vaunts which had be 
come part of her ideal of me. 
The course of true love ran smooth during 
all those years. While she was at home our 
correspondence was carried on through Ga 
briel Henri who Elvise said had written her 
from five to twenty notes a day ever since 
she could read. By the time she had 
graduated from one of the women's colleges 
just beginning to be popular at the North I 
had been admitted to the bar not only of 
Kansas where I had invested my little surplus 
but of Louisiana where I had taken up my 
residence. It was arranged that on her 
twenty-first birthday I should demand both 
the hand and fortune of my betrothed from 
her guardian. I expected a rough time. Ac 
cepting the invitation of Gabriel Henri to be 
his guest at Grisombois I arrived on the 
twenty-seventh of March and on the morning 
<pb>
204 Cbe Brave of Cante Sngelique. 
of the twenty-eighth dispatched the follow 
ing note to Colonel Dinsmere dear 
SIR We have the honour to demand 
on behalf of our client Miss Elvise Theronde 
an account of the estate of the late Angelique 
Dinsmere spinster who died on the twenty 
ninth of March 1853 leaving a will in which 
you are named executor and residuary legatee 
while the body of the estate is bequeathed to 
the children of Alice Dinsmere Theronde 
should any be alive at the decease of said 
Angelique. As Miss Elvise Theronde was 
born on the twenty-eighth of March of the 
same year her mother Alice dying some 
months later said estate has been in your 
hands as guardian since that time. 
Respectfully 
RIDOUX robbins Attys. 
New Orleans. 
An hour after my messenger had gone I 
followed him on the road to Feuilleverte. 
On the way I turned aside to visit the 
burying ground. I had not seen it since I 
had worked in it five years before. Hitching 
my horse at the rack behind the little chapel 
I went up the avenue of live oaks to the crest 
of the hill where they stretched out on either 
side guarding the verdure shaded dead. 
<pb>
ttbe Brave of ttante Bngellque. 205 
Time had made it more beautiful than ever. 
I went through the labyrinth of white shell 
walks to the nook where stood the empty 
tomb of Tante Angelique. Kneeling beside 
it was Elvise more lovely more womanly I 
took off my hat and waited until she raised 
her head 
I don't know how long it had been. The 
sun had driven us from our seat on the stone 
and we had gone to a rustic bench under a 
bower of climbing roses. The entrances to 
the enclosure around the memorial of Tante 
Angelique were on two sides where the 
arbour vita that formed a dense wall of green 
was clipped into an archway over the path. 
At each corner of the square stood a weeping 
willow whose branches swept the ground. 
Under the shade of this verdant spray was a 
little kiosk planted with Chickasaw roses. 
Once within it the occupant was buried as 
deep as the dead under their stones. Ap 
proaching footsteps interrupted us and two 
men came through the opening in the ever 
greens and stood beside the grave. 
You see James said one that you 
were mistaken. There is the stone which 
distinctly says your aunt Angelique died on 
<pb>
206 Cbe rave of ttante angelique. 
the 2yth of March. And you know Elvise 
was born on the 28th so the provision of the 
will which leaves angelique's estate to the 
children of sister Alice who may be living at 
the time of her decease is void for want of 
parties answering to that description. Poor 
Angelique she never forgave Alice for com 
ing between her and Theronde though she 
never seemed to spite Theronde for marrying 
Alice. 
I was sure the date on the inscription was 
March zgth said the young man. I can't 
believe my memory would play me such a 
trick. I have always prided myself on my 
memory. 
Oh one often forgets the most familiar 
things said Colonel Dinsmere carelessly. 
I don't said his son. 
Well you forgot this and you've studied 
your lessons here many a day jocosely. 
So it would seem but I don't understand 
it. I I suppose it is the same stone 
There was a question in his tone which must 
have given the older man a start. 
Of course it is i could swear to that. 
And you ought to be glad it is. It makes a 
<pb>
Brave of ixante Sngelique. 207 
difference of something like fifty thousand 
dollars to you but 
you know father every one thinks 
Elvise Tante angelique's heir and you have 
held the property as guardian during her 
minority he protested. 
Not as guardian James but as executor. 
I have never filed any bond or made any re 
turns as guardian. If everybody jumped to 
the conclusion that she was an heiress i'm not 
responsible. 
But father such ideas don't get around 
without some foundation. What proof is 
there of the day Tante ang6lique died? 
There was a letter from the captain of 
the ship with an extract from the log and a 
certificate of her death and burial at sea. 
They were signed by the captain and wit 
nessed by several passengers. 
And what became of it? 
You know very well. The Yankee raiders 
burned it with the rest of my papers. 
The log book would still be available 
evidence wouldn't it? 
I have made every exertion to procure it 
was the dignified reply. It seems that the 
sloop was one of those Baltimore clippers as 
<pb>
2o8 cbe Grave of Cantc 'Hngelique. 
they were called which were the pride of the 
seas just before steam destroyed all demand 
for sailing craft and ran from Cuba to New 
Orleans. It was on the trip from Havana 
that Angelique poor girl died of yellow fever. 
Afterward the sloop was in the Australian 
trade and was one of the vessels destroyed by 
the Shenandoah the Confederate cruiser 
near the close of the war. Of course the 
captain's books and all the ship's papers were 
lost then. 
So there is really no evidence but this 
stone not 
a particle said the Colonel with 
emphasis. 
The younger man was silent and we heard 
the tap tapping of his whip against the tablet. 
At last he saidi must have time to think 
this over father. I have an engagement 
with Gabriel Henri and if you will excuse 
me no don't come with me please. I wish 
to think and I think best alone. 
He made his way out of the enclosure. His 
steps grew faint and we heard him mount 
his horse and ride away. Somehow I felt 
sorry for the proud old man sitting there 
whose ambition for his son had made him 
<pb>
ttbe Brave of ante Sngelique. 209 
not only the violator of a sacred trust but a 
criminal. I knew by this time what it meant 
to falsify such a record knew that no jury 
would fail to convict him nor any judge to 
give him the full penalty of the law. But 
motioning to Elvise to remain I stepped from 
behind the curtain of willow branches and 
said good morning Colonel Dinsmere. 
He sprang up. You you! he ex 
claimed with a look of terror. Where did 
you come from o 
I have been here for more than an 
hour I answered. 
Here where he gasped. I motioned 
to the little kiosk. 
You miserable hound you are a spy then 
as well as a 
Hold on Colonel hold on i ex 
claimed good humoredly as he raised his 
heavy cane and started toward me his face 
distorted with rage. Hold on a minute 
and you'll see you are making a great mis 
take. you're quite right about the bark 
Elsinore and her log book but this tablet is 
not the only bit of evidence on which the 
date of ang^lique dinsmere's death rests. 
Captain Whipple wrote a letter to his wife in 
<pb>
zio r be Brave of ttante Sngelique. 
April 1853 in which he says that his vessel 
was detained in quarantine on her arrival at 
New Orleans owing to a death on board from 
yellow fever when five days out from Havana. 
He gives the name of the deceased and says 
the exact date is March agth. I have an 
attested copy of the letter. 
It is a forgery hotly. Captain Whipple 
personally assured me before his death that 
there was no record of the voyage extant. 
You are mistaken sir if you think I can be 
intimidated in this manner. 
Colonel Dinsmere I heard all that has 
just been said and fully understand your pur 
pose in employing me to falsify this inscription 

Sir do you mean to insinuate ah 
ah i deny it sir I deny it and the 
word of a Dinsmere will still outweigh that 
of a Yankee blackmailer off my premises 
this minute you insolent dog dont 
let's have any hard names sir. 
that's a game two can play and just now I 
hold the winning hand. It won't do to bully 
a man who can send you to the State prison. 
I did not come here unprovided against any 
attack that might be made on either my 
<pb>
ttbe (Btave of Cante Snaelique. 2 
person or my character. Evidence which 
would convict you of a most heinous offence 
is in the hands of my partner in the city. 
If he does not hear from me to the contrary 
it will be laid before the grand jury next 
week. The witnesses are of the most un 
impeachable character among them this stone 
by which you stand. I was a green boy five 
years ago but I knew better than to put 
myself in the way of a crime. If you will 
feel the under side of the slab you will see 
that it only needs to be turned over to tell 
its own story. The original inscripiion is 
there untouched and at least four persons 
beside myself know the facts connected with 
its reversal. 
He stooped and felt under the stone. 
When he straightened up the pallor on his 
face was pitiful. He drew a long breath and 
in a little while asked quietly what do 
you want two 
things first to save your name 
from disgrace second the hand of your 
niece in marriage. 
I fancy she may have something to say 
about that. 
<pb>
212 tebe Crave of tlante 
She is aware of the application and 
approves it. 
Being anxious to handle her fortune no 
doubt you've befooled the girl. I remember 
your boast that you would do anything for 
money sneeringly. 
On the contrary every dollar of it shall 
be settled on her subject to her sole disposal. 
But neither Elvise nor I wish to humiliate you 
sir in any way and instead of exacting all 
that is due I think she would accept half the 
sum that a little while ago you told your son 
the estate was worth to him. In fact I will 
put that much more with it and let her con 
trol the whole. This was a pretty bold play 
but I had been fortunate in my speculations 
and could make it good though not much 
more. There were indications of a town 
growing up on the Kansas land I had bought 
four years before and if nothing happened 
to divert our boom I should have plenty to 
my credit before long. 
But objected the Colonel my son 
expects to make this lady his wife. 
Your son will be glad that you do not 
insist on the marriage. But for your wishes 
<pb>
he would long ago have contracted a much 
more advantageous alliance. 
The old man was silent. He looked away 
from me beyond the willows and the live 
oaks. tomorrow then he said at last 
you shall have your answer. 
Pardon me Colonel it is known that I 
am on my way to Feuilleverte. I cannot go to 
your house in any uncertain relation. If 
you cannot invite me there as the accepted 
lover of your niece I shall ride away and 
leave events to take their course. 
But if if the past 
Shall be as if it never had been I said 
completing his sentence cordially. 
And Elvise 
There was a rustle among the roses and 
my betrothed stepped out. What about 
Elvise she asked merrily. 
Elvise ! Elvise you here cried the old 
man in agony. How long have you been 
here? 
Oh said my sweetheart with an in 
genuous blush I have only been here a lit 
tle while. I knew Egbert was to ride over 
from Gabriel henri's and as he did not 
come as soon as I thought he ought to I came 
<pb>
to meet him. I heard you talking and was 
here in time to hear him say something about 
only taking half Tante angelique's money. 
It is exactly what I should have said if I had 
thought of it. i'm sure dear Uncle I should 
have had nothing at all if it hadn't been for 
your care she threw her arms around her 
uncle's neck and smiled up into his face. 
Besides James will be awfully relieved to 
find he doesn't have to marry me she 
added and hid her blushing face against his 
coat. 
Colonel Dinsmere looked down at her 
smiled an instant then putting his hands be 
fore his face shook with sobs. Elvise tried in 
her pretty way to comfort him but he said 
brokenly dont dear don't. I am not 
worthy of it. I I tried to rob you I for 
got my promise to your dead mother. Hate 
me dear don't offer me love when you can 
never respect me again dear 
Uncle Archie she answered put 
ting her cheek against his you could not 
have done any wrong to your Elvise. You 
might have been tempted everybody is 
tempted but you couldn't really have done 
it no never ! 
<pb>
Brave of ttante Bngelique. 215 
You are sure you can forgive me i 
can't forgive what never was can I 
Uncle Archie she asked laughing. You 
have been the best of fathers to me and if 
you ever thought to be otherwise it is for 
gotten. 
She meant it and before we reached the 
house I think the Colonel had forgotten it 
too in her happy lighthearted chatter. He 
never became very fond of me though I be 
came a senator and a millionaire but his love 
for my wife was an adoration. He made rep 
aration many times over for the wrong that 
was planned and just before he died he sent 
for me and asked that the slab over the empty 
grave of Tante Angclique be turned again 
but I showed him it was not best. James 
never knew nor do I think he suspected why 
his father's plans for him had been so 
changed and in the old plantation burying 
ground at Feuilleverte my boyish work still 
remains as modest and unpretentious as if it 
was the true record of the death of the un 
happy woman whose only earthly memorial 
it is. 
THE END. 
<pb>
Boofce bs Hlbion W. 
NOVELS of the SOUTH. 
Completes that series of historical novels . . which have illus 
trated so forcibly and graphically the era of our Civil War the causes 
that led up to it and the consequences resulting from it. . forcible 
picturesque. Chicago Evening Journal 
HOT PLOUGHSHARES Rise of Antislavery Senti 
ment. $1.50 
FIGS AND THISTLES ATYPICAL American Career. 
Crowded with incident . . strong characters . humour . . absorbing 
interest. Boston Commonwealth. 
$1.50 
A ROYAL GENTLEMAN Master and Slave. $1 50 
Grasps histonc lines and mingles with them threads of love mystery 
adventure crime battlelield and hospital. Albany Evening Journal. 
A POOL's ERRAND and THE INV ls..ble EMPIRE 
Reconstruction. $1.50 
The book wim rank among the famous novels that once written 
must be rad by everybody. Portland Advertiser. 
BTUOK3 WITHOUT STRAW The Pondage of the 
Fruedman). $1.50 
Scarcely anything in fiction so powerful has been written from a. 
merely literary standpoint as these tw« books. Springfield Mass 
J\^Pnblican. 
JOHN ea.x't>e South Without The Shadow. $1.25 
Rare pictures of Southern lite drawn by a Northern hand in a man 
ner as masterly as it is natural. Yicksburg Miss Herald. 
OTHER WORKS. 
A thrilling story of everyday life . . full of the striking picturesqueness 
of romantic scenes artistically selected and vividly portrayed. 
Boston Traveller. 
MURVALE EASTMAN Christian Socialist. Cloth 
$1.50 Uniform Edition a 
great book . . wise hopeful artistic with a broad basis of 
the soundest sense. Bishop JOHN H. VINCENT. 
ELA.CK ICE. A Story of the North. A ringing winter 
youth and love thoroughbred horses curious and inter 
esting rura1 characters. Cloth $1.50 Uniform Edition or 
Special Binding. 
Really original. Boston Gazette. 
Thoroughly interesting. Chicago Inter ocean. 
Strange and exciting. Art Amateur Neva York. 
Uniform Illustrated Edition s1.5o per Vol. except 
JO H V E AXE &1.25 set 8 Vols. boxed $11.50 
AN APPEAL TO c ffisar. The Race Problem 
The Dangers of Illiteracy and National Aid to Education 
With Diagrams and Tables. Cloth $1.25 
As interesting as tr.niling as his novels are and far more startling. 
iz?ai/y Advertiser Boston. 
FORDS HOWARD hulbert 
47 East 10th St. New fork. 
<pb>
It Is in truth the ntortf of Abraham lincoln's lift 
rather than his mere biography. . . told in the 
most entertaining way. It is a book to lie on the. family 
table and to be often and enjoyably perused abraham 
LINCOLN 
The True Story of a Great Life. 
BY WILLIAM O. STODDARD 
ONE OF PRESIDENT LINCOLN's SECRETARIES DURING THE 
WAR OF THE REBELLION. 
With Illustrations. 
One Volume Octavo 508 pages SO. 
Has strong claims upon the interest and attention of 
every American. a graphic and entertaining biog 
raphy as rich in incident as any romance and sparkling 
with wise wit and racy anecdote. It comprises a large mass 
of valuable and judiciously epitomised information. Har 
per's Monthly. 
From it we get a definite impression of life at the White 
House during the first four years of the war as well as some 
idea of Executive methods during those troublous times. chicago 
Evening Journal. 
Mr. stoddard's in our opinion approaches closely to the 
ideal biography and scarcely will be superseded by the 
efforts of any subsequent author. Literary World Boston. 
Mr. stoddard's Is the best. . . abounds in senti 
ment so happily blended with history as to make it as 
attractive as any romance. Chicago Inter ocean. 
His account of Mr. lincoln's youth is very striking and he 
gives a minute and interesting narrative of the slow and 
careful steps by which he fitted himself for political life. He 
brings out distinctly Mr. lincoln's sagacity and patience in 
critical periods. . . and he sets in strong light the President's 
patriotism unselfishness tenderness and religious 
spirit. New York Tribune. 
FORDS HOWARD hulbert 
47 Eatt wch St. Kew fork. 
<pb>
If you want your Boys to stay Some 
o nights 
GIVE THEM 
BULLET P SHELL 
A soldier's Romance. 
BY MAJ. GEORGE F. WILLIAMS 
Volunteer Private Officer and War Correspondent. 
WITH RELIEF ETCHINGS FROM SKETCHES AMONG THE 
ACTUAL SCENES 
BY EDWIN FORBES 
Special Artist with the Armies in the Field. 
One Volume 434 pages BO. 
Readable as a novel. . . lavishly illustrated. San 
Francisco Chronicle. 
The old soldier can take it up and read It to his boys and 
as the flood of memory rushes on his brain and a spark of 
the old fire kindles in his blood he can say as he finishes 
some vivid passage that recalls the past Boys I was 
there New York Commercial Advertiser. 
MAJOR WILLIAMS was a graphic war correspondent of this 
journal during the rebellion. He was an eyewitness of 
many of the most important battles of the war and fought in 
some of them himself. New York Times. 
Illustrated by spirited etchings by Edwin Forbes pictorial 
war correspondent a member of the French Etching 
Club who was present ai many of the battles. San Fran 
cisco Argonaut. 
Its pictures of scenes both comic and tragic give a truer 
and better idea of army life in camp campaign battle and 
hospital than any book I have ever examined while the 
etchings of the renowned Forbes are true to life. gen. W. 
H GIBSON of Ohio. 
FORDS HOWARD hulbert 
47 East 10th St.. New York. 
<pb>
Cbe ipictorian Classic 
A volume especially adapted to gifts between 
Friends for Literary Prizes etc. but also in perennial 
demand for personal study the richest most 
luminous most helpful and beautiful of modern 
poems 
TENNYSON's 
IN MEMORIAM 
Critical Preface by HENRY TAN DYKE Exquisitely 
Illustrated by HARRY FENN. 
in Memoriam is unquestionably the greatest poem of 
the century. It contains the deepest thought the tenderest 
affection the holiest aspiration of the chief English poet ot 
our time. . the present volume is a worthy setting for 
such a noble work. . a classic edition of a great clas 
sic. y. Observer. 
This volume is a delight to the eye. . both in spirit 
and in form it is an exquisite production. Philadelphia 
Press. 
There are no hands into which it can fall without in 
creasing their appreciation of the work which it so beautifully 
enshrines. literary World Boston. 
A classic of Friendship. Dr. VAN DYKE says He turns 
back to trace the pathway of friendship and remembers 
how love made it fair and sweet doubling all joy and 
dividing all pain Preface to tilts Edition. 
A classic of consolation . for one who seeks a gift 
for a friend in sorrow nothing could be more beautiful and 
appropriate. The Church Economist N. Y. 
Will bring deep satisfaction to a v«ry wide public. AY. 
Tribune. 
Elegantly printed > o in n nllk boxed w3.5o 
FORDS HOWARD hulbert 
47 Eatt loth St. Neio fork. 
<pb>
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 
39015063972841 
<pb>
DO NOT REMOVE 
OR 
MUTUAL 

<pb>
Quality 
Estimated percentage of bad pages = 0.43 
Estimated percentage of missing pages = 0.00 
Estimated percentage of tight bound pages = 0.09 
<pb>
Image Calibration Detected Page Number Page Tags 
1 13510798885539979 FRONT COVER IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER MISSING PAGE 
2 13510798885539979 IMAGE ON PAGE UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
3 13510798885539979 IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
4 13510798885539979 BLANK IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
5 13510798885539979 IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
6 13510798885539979 BLANK IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
7 13510798885539979 BLANK IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
8 13510798885539979 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
9 13510798885539979 1 TITLE UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
10 13510798885539979 2 COPYRIGHT UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
11 13510798885539979 3 TABLE OF CONTENTS UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
12 13510798885539979 4 BLANK IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
13 13510798885539979 5 CHAPTER START FIRST CONTENT CHAPTER START UNTYPICAL PAGE 
14 13510798885539979 6 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
15 13510798885539979 7 
16 13510798885539979 8 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
17 13510798885539979 9 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
18 13510798885539979 10 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
19 13510798885539979 11 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
20 13510798885539979 12 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
21 13510798885539979 13 
22 13510798885539979 14 
23 13510798885539979 15 
24 13510798885539979 16 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
25 13510798885539979 17 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
26 13510798885539979 18 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
27 13510798885539979 19 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
28 13510798885539979 20 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
29 13510798885539979 21 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
30 13510798885539979 22 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
31 13510798885539979 23 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
32 13510798885539979 24 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
33 13510798885539979 25 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
34 13510798885539979 26 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
35 13510798885539979 27 
36 13510798885539979 28 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
37 13510798885539979 29 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
38 13510798885539979 30 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
39 13510798885539979 31 
40 13510798885539979 32 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
41 13510798885539979 33 
42 13510798885539979 34 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
43 13510798885539979 35 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
44 13510798885539979 36 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
45 13510798885539979 37 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
46 13510798885539979 38 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
47 13510798885539979 39 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
48 13510798885539979 40 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
49 13510798885539979 41 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
50 13510798885539979 42 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
51 13510798885539979 43 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
52 13510798885539979 44 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
53 13510798885539979 45 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
54 13510798885539979 46 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
55 13510798885539979 47 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
56 13510798885539979 48 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
57 13510798885539979 49 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
58 13510798885539979 50 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
59 13510798885539979 51 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
60 13510798885539979 52 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
61 13510798885539979 53 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
62 13510798885539979 54 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
63 13510798885539979 55 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
64 13510798885539979 56 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
65 13510798885539979 57 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
66 13510798885539979 58 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
67 13510798885539979 59 
68 13510798885539979 60 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
69 13510798885539979 61 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
70 13510798885539979 62 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
71 13510798885539979 63 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
72 13510798885539979 64 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
73 13510798885539979 65 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
74 13510798885539979 66 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
75 13510798885539979 67 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
76 13510798885539979 68 
77 13510798885539979 69 
78 13510798885539979 70 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
79 13510798885539979 71 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
80 13510798885539979 72 
81 13510798885539979 73 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
82 13510798885539979 74 
83 13510798885539979 75 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
84 13510798885539979 76 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
85 13510798885539979 77 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
86 13510798885539979 78 
87 13510798885539979 79 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
88 13510798885539979 80 PAGE TURNBACK UNTYPICAL PAGE 
89 13510798885539979 81 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
90 13510798885539979 82 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
91 13510798885539979 83 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
92 13510798885539979 84 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
93 13510798885539979 85 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
94 13510798885539979 86 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
95 13510798885539979 87 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
96 13510798885539979 88 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
97 13510798885539979 89 
98 13510798885539979 90 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
99 13510798885539979 91 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
100 13510798885539979 92 BLANK IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
101 13510798885539979 93 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
102 13510798885539979 94 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
103 13510798885539979 95 CHAPTER START UNTYPICAL PAGE 
104 13510798885539979 96 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
105 13510798885539979 97 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
106 13510798885539979 98 
107 13510798885539979 99 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
108 13510798885539979 100 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
109 13510798885539979 101 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
110 13510798885539979 102 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
111 13510798885539979 103 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
112 13510798885539979 104 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
113 13510798885539979 105 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
114 13510798885539979 106 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
115 13510798885539979 107 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
116 13510798885539979 108 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
117 13510798885539979 109 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
118 13510798885539979 110 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
119 13510798885539979 111 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
120 13510798885539979 112 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
121 13510798885539979 113 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
122 13510798885539979 114 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
123 13510798885539979 115 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
124 13510798885539979 116 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
125 13510798885539979 117 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
126 13510798885539979 118 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
127 13510798885539979 119 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
128 13510798885539979 120 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
129 13510798885539979 121 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
130 13510798885539979 122 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
131 13510798885539979 123 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
132 13510798885539979 124 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
133 13510798885539979 125 
134 13510798885539979 126 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
135 13510798885539979 127 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
136 13510798885539979 128 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
137 13510798885539979 129 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
138 13510798885539979 130 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
139 13510798885539979 131 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
140 13510798885539979 132 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
141 13510798885539979 133 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
142 13510798885539979 134 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
143 13510798885539979 135 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
144 13510798885539979 136 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
145 13510798885539979 137 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
146 13510798885539979 138 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
147 13510798885539979 139 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
148 13510798885539979 140 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
149 13510798885539979 141 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
150 13510798885539979 142 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
151 13510798885539979 143 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
152 13510798885539979 144 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
153 13510798885539979 145 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
154 13510798885539979 146 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
155 13510798885539979 147 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
156 13510798885539979 148 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
157 13510798885539979 149 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
158 13510798885539979 150 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
159 13510798885539979 151 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
160 13510798885539979 152 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
161 13510798885539979 153 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
162 13510798885539979 154 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
163 13510798885539979 155 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
164 13510798885539979 156 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
165 13510798885539979 157 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
166 13510798885539979 158 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
167 13510798885539979 159 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
168 13510798885539979 160 BLANK IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
169 13510798885539979 161 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
170 13510798885539979 162 IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
171 13510798885539979 163 CHAPTER START UNTYPICAL PAGE 
172 13510798885539979 164 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
173 13510798885539979 165 
174 13510798885539979 166 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
175 13510798885539979 167 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
176 13510798885539979 168 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
177 13510798885539979 169 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
178 13510798885539979 170 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
179 13510798885539979 171 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
180 13510798885539979 172 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
181 13510798885539979 173 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
182 13510798885539979 174 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
183 13510798885539979 175 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
184 13510798885539979 176 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
185 13510798885539979 177 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
186 13510798885539979 178 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
187 13510798885539979 179 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
188 13510798885539979 180 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
189 13510798885539979 181 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
190 13510798885539979 182 
191 13510798885539979 183 
192 13510798885539979 184 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
193 13510798885539979 185 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
194 13510798885539979 186 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
195 13510798885539979 187 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
196 13510798885539979 188 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
197 13510798885539979 189 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
198 13510798885539979 190 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
199 13510798885539979 191 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
200 13510798885539979 192 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
201 13510798885539979 193 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
202 13510798885539979 194 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
203 13510798885539979 195 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
204 13510798885539979 196 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
205 13510798885539979 197 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
206 13510798885539979 198 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
207 13510798885539979 199 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
208 13510798885539979 200 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
209 13510798885539979 201 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
210 13510798885539979 202 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
211 13510798885539979 203 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
212 13510798885539979 204 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
213 13510798885539979 205 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
214 13510798885539979 206 
215 13510798885539979 207 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
216 13510798885539979 208 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
217 13510798885539979 209 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
218 13510798885539979 210 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
219 13510798885539979 211 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
220 13510798885539979 212 
221 13510798885539979 213 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
222 13510798885539979 214 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
223 13510798885539979 215 UNTYPICAL PAGE 
224 13510798885539979 216 IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
225 13510798885539979 217 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
226 13510798885539979 218 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
227 13510798885539979 219 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
228 13510798885539979 220 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
229 13510798885539979 221 IMAGE ON PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
230 13510798885539979 222 UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
231 13510798885539979 223 BACK COVER IMAGE ON PAGE UNTYPICAL PAGE IMPLICIT PAGE NUMBER 
</div>
<pb>
