<div id="the dark mountains;the return of the wanderer" code="0" wordcount="4018">
<pb>
fxxntzixm Inters. 
^xxtxtas of tjf* 
sift xrf 
George W. Furnees »21 
<pb>
<pb>
BEING THE SEQUEL TO 
THE JOURNEY HOME. 
BY THE REV. EDWARD A. MONRO 
PERPETUAL CURATE OF HARROW WEALD. philadelphia 

H. HOOKEK s. W. COR. CHESTNUT AND EIGHTH STS. 
1858 
<pb>
Ml 
CHAPTER l 
The Return of the Wanderer 5 
CHAPTER ii 
Edwin The Brief Probation 22 
CHAPTER m. 
The Tests of Love 43 
CHAPTER iv 
The Challenge in the Cavern 56 
CHAPTER v 
The Shadows of Death 72 
CHAPTER vi 
Lost and Found 104 
chapter till. 
* the Lengthening of the Shadows 112 
chapter viii 
the Fleeing of the Shadows 120 
c CHAPTER ix 
Without Grace Lost 131 
(3) 
cfc RECAP 
<pb>
CHAPTER x 
The Approach to the End 
CHAPTER xi 
The Terrible Claimant 
CHAPTER xii 
The Gates of the City 
<pb>
chapter 
I. 
THE RETURN OP THE WANDERER. 
Come unto Me and I will give you rest. 
To those that seek Thee Thou art kind 
But what art Thou to those that find! 
Cyril continued his solitary and saddened 
journey. Florizel was gone he was at home 
at rest. The strife was over he had passed the 
Valley of the Shadow of Death and his warfare 
was accomplished. How happy are those who 
are at rest forever! 
Florizel dear peaceful Florizel would I had 
you with me! But I will not wish you back 
again you are safe. I shall go to you but you 
will not return to me 
Such was often the burden of cyril's song. 
The dullness which weighed upon his spirit after 
1* (5) 
<pb>
the excitement which he had gone through was 
great. He was pressed down with a load too 
heavy to bear. But he pursued his journey 
nevertheless. Home lay before him and in that 
home was all he loved. He carried his glass 
with him and through that he could ever and 
anon see the end of his journey. But it was at 
times dim and shadows and mists hung heavily 
over the distance indeed Cyril had never before 
found it so hard to see the bright vision as just 
after florizel's departure. 
He often gave an anxious thought after Pietro. 
Where was he? Had he perished among the 
ruins? Had the warriors of Azrael born him 
to their dismal abode? Was he beyond the call 
and reach of his Deliverer? Had he erred too 
signally too deeply too often? Poor Pietro! 
How sad to have set out on a road the end of 
which he was never to see and when Cyril 
thought on these things he wept. He remembered 
where it was written one shall be taken 
and the other left and he trembled at the 
thought of his own narrow escape. As he went 
on he often said My spirit is overwhelmed 
within me I remember the days of old. I stretch 
forth my hands unto Thee my soul thirsteth 
after Thee as a thirsty land. Cause me to hear 
Thy loving kindness in the morning for in Thee 
<pb>
do I trust cause me to know the way wherein I 
should walk for I lift up my soul unto Thee. 
In such words Cyril would give utterance to his 
inward feelings in the night watch and the long 
day journey. 
As he thus travelled alone he one night saw 
on a sudden some one coming toward him. The 
traveller was as one who was taking a far journey 
and had yet far to go. He bore in his hand a 
lamp whose rays shot widely into the surrounding 
mists. He came swiftly as if he sought for 
some object of anxiety. As he approached Cyril 
paused but the traveller had no word for him. 
He was intent on a distant mission and passed 
the solitary boy without noticing him. Cyril 
gazed after him and made up his mind that he 
was one of those who are ever moving to and 
fro on some errand of mercy from the city of the 
King. 
Still the form as it went by had about it an air 
of inexpressible loveliness and though so shrouded 
in soft mists that he could scarcely discern it 
he paused to gaze after it resting on his staff. 
The traveller receded and with him the soft light 
of the lamp which he bore. As Cyril stood 
wrapped in earnest gaze he imagined that words 
of unutterable tenderness yet mingled with sadness 
were born to him upon the air. 
<pb>
I go to seek and to save that which is lost. 
Him that cometh unto me I will in no wise 
cast out. Return ye backsliding children and 
I will heal your backsliding. 
Then Cyril fancied he heard a voice very far 
away which answered with mournful entreaty 
Behold we turn unto Thee for Thou art the 
Lord our God. 
Then there seemed to come from the Messenger 
an answer soft and lovely Oh what shall I do 
unto thee? for thy goodness has been as a morning 
cloud and as the early dew which goeth 
away. 
To which those distant voices gave answer 
Come and let us return unto the Lord for He 
will heal us He will bind us up. 
Now all this riveted cyril's attention and he 
wondered what would come of it and remembering 
the ruins of the palace from which he had 
escaped and the many poor wretches who must 
be lying forlorn and prisoned there he began to 
think that perhaps the Messenger was wending 
his way to the scene of woe. He thought of 
Pietro and seeing a resting-place provided for 
wayfaring men by the side of the road it being 
now a bright moonlight night the boy sat him 
down with his staff beside him to watch what 
might be the end of the matter. 
<pb>
We will follow for a few moments the footsteps 
of the holy Visitant. I thought I followed him. 
Not very far away from the spot which he had 
now reached lay the ruins of the palace. No 
words can describe how desolate and wild the 
scene was. In the day of its magnificence it had 
had no background but utter night seemed to 
press against its windows with a darkness which 
might be felt. But now when not a ray lingered 
of all its brilliant illuminations and blazing fires 
now that impenetrable shade had sunk on its 
huge shapeless ruins which lay in wild confusion 
round nothing could be more terrible. I noticed 
as I approached that a howling wind blew piteously 
among the fragments of ruins and ever and 
anon the sky and clouds would gape for the instant 
as if to show beyond a world of fire and 
as the lightning blazed forth followed by the low 
moanings of distant thunder occasional rifts were 
made in the sky and an appalling sight struck 
my eye for far away against the lurid vault I 
fancied I saw the chariot of Azrael rolling on 
and his wild horses and countless warriors with 
him and they seemed to me as if they were 
going to and from the ruins. 
Once or twice as I approached the spot I saw 
on some masses of broken stone which lay around 
a new inscription I had never seen before 
<pb>
whether it was that now portions of the building 
were turned to me which had not been I knew 
not but it was no more Let us eat and drink 
for tomorrow we die for the very letters of 
these words seemed to have crumbled to dust 
but the words now on which the lightning played 
were The fool hath said in his heart there is 
no God. Thou fool! this night thy soul shall 
be required of thee. 
In this wild and troubled chaos a great stir 
was going on for ever and anon I saw the chariot 
of Azrael or some of his satellites dashing amid 
the ruins and seizing some poor maimed creature 
who had crept to the rocks for shelter and they 
would bear him away amid shrieks and cries of 
despair to the goal from which themselves had 
eome. 
While I was looking on this scene of despair 
and meditating on what had befallen those who 
had taken refuge in the palace I heard a low 
moan beside me and turning round I saw as 
far as the darkness would let me a youth who 
was in evident anguish he was struggling to free 
himself from the weight of the stone which lay 
upon him but in vain and as he lay I overheard 
him talking with himself in a low undertone. 

Alas me! undone! undone! would I were 
<pb>
but back in the narrow road. But that I shall 
never see again my happy home! Oh my companions 
of other days shall we never meet again. 
Oh who will deliver me from the body of this 
death? Oh Cyril Cyril why did I not follow 
thee? Why did not I listen to the voice of the 
Deliverer when he stood waiting to be gracious? 
So he continued lamenting and I did not 
doubt but that it was Pietro. Now as I was 
watching him and was wondering if any help 
would come in the darkness I heard one who was 
lying in evil plight near the unhappy boy who 
spoke to him thus 
Where is the use of your cry? Think you 
that the Deliverer will come to you when you have 
been living in the palace which is the home of 
his enemy and which has especially denied his 
name and power. No no you might have done 
much which he would have forgiven erred against 
Him in a hundred ways strayed from the road 
or rebelled against Him but infidelity to Him 
the denial of His name He will not brook. No 
no be wise and make good terms with Azrael 
the best you can better reign in his dark realm 
than be a crushed worm among the lost. Be sure 
all the rest is past recovery. 
Then Pietro gave way to bitter lamentations 
and cried loudly on the name of the Deliverer but 
<pb>
as he cried a flash of lightning rent the cloud 
and through the rift of the storm I could see advancing 
azrael's chariot drawn by his wild 
horses and the figure of the dark one leaned forward 
as if to urge them on to a more and more 
furious pace. He was coming straight in the direction 
of Pietro and so I plainly saw the poor 
youth thought for he struggled to be free though 
every struggle was in vain.. 
Alas cried Pietro I have sown the wind 
and I reap the whirlwind what has my unbelief 
done me? I have refused His proffered aid when 
He was near me and those I have followed leave 
me to perish. 
Now as he thns continued crying I thought 
that from the other side to that from which Azrael 
was advancing a light was visible like the 
light of some morning star which shines out single 
and clear after a tempestuous night and the ray 
pierced far and wide amid the rnins as if he who 
bore it intended to let it fall on some one desired 
object for which he sought. At the same time I 
heard afar though clearly and distinctly a voice 
which spoke in words something like these 
Thou hast destroyed thyself but in Me is thy 
help. I will ransom thee from the power of 
the grave I will redeem thee from death I will 
<pb>
heal thy backslidings: I will love thee freely for 
Mine anger is turned away from thee. 
And with the voice I saw the light of the lamp 
fall in a straight and direct beam on pietro's pale 
and emaciated face. I seldom saw a countenance 
which so quickly changed and became illumined 
with such sudden transports of joy. I looked to 
see the figure of Him who might be bearing the 
lamp but though the lamp fell so far before Him 
He was Himself very far away I turned round 
when to my terror I saw the chariot of Azrael advancing 
at full speed toward the spot. It became 
now a matter of anxiety indeed who would be 
the first who should reach Pietro. 
He soon became aware of his being the object 
of their combined approach. It was clear to 
which it was that the poor youth turned with all 
the power of his will. The way in which he had 
fallen directed his face toward the part of the sky 
from which the chariot of Azrael was seen approaching 
while he so lay that he could not without 
great effort turn toward the advancing form 
of the Deliverer. Yet that effort was made. 
Turn ye to Me and be saved I am He who 
will heal your backslidings cried the Voice on 
the right hand. 
Wretch thou art mine beyond redemption 
shouted the voice of Azrael as he lashed his 
2 
<pb>
horses onward along their pathway of air toward 
where Pietro lay. 
In vain the boy strove to turn or rise in vain 
he tried to fix his steady gaze on the object of his 
love he lay as one in a hideous dream unable to 
move himself and that wholly owing to the way 
in which he had fallen beneath the masses of the 
ruins. 
And now I beheld what filled my soul with wonder 
and distress. Pietro either exhausted by the 
effort or paralysed by the sight of Azrael looked 
no more toward the Deliverer but like one spellbound 
only gazed on the former. I knew how 
much the merciful Being needed those whom He 
came to save to turn to him. I knew how He 
ever needed the turning of the will to Him and I 
trembled. 
Then I began to think all was lost for the 
horses of Azrael advanced at terrible rapidity 
and I looked around in vain for help and saw 
none. It never struck me sufficiently that He 
Who was coming to seek Pietro was mighty to 
save and that His Grace was all sufficient to enable 
him to turn to Him. 
Mine mine mine shouted the dark one as 
he rushed upon his victim. 
But as he stretched out his hand to seize him 
<pb>
Pietro closed his eyes and said Jesus I would 
be Thine. 
No sooner were the words uttered than a shock 
like that of an earthquake shook the ground. The 
stone rolled off the body of Pietro as a grain of 
sand by the seashore and the hand of the merciful 
one held that of the boy. He lifted him up. 
Pietro feeling himself free threw himself on his 
deliverer's bosom and wept for joy and I heard 
the words whose meaning I never so fully felt before 
Draw nigh to God and He will draw nigh to you. 
Resist the devil and he will flee from you. For 
I beheld and lo as one who was constrained yet 
gnashing his teeth with fury Azrael was driving 
away and Pietro leaning on the Almighty Arm 
retraced his footsteps to the narrow way. 
He followed the Blessed Guide but with such 
an eagerness of attention as seemed to imply that 
he dreaded every instant lest he might lose sight 
of Him. As he walked on he kept on saying 
Thou shalt be my Guide even unto death 
and as he said it there came an answer of love 
which saidi will guide your feet into the ways 
of peace. Oh Pietro looked so happy so at 
rest! They had no easy journey for the huge 
fragments of rock which lay scattered in the way 
were continual difficulties. But more still the 
deep and sad moanings of those who lay crushed 
<pb>
beneath their weight rent the air they seemed 
in pain alike of mind and body and among them 
in the deep darkness I saw the emissaries of 
Azrael going to and fro. Continually did the 
Blessed One pause and the pale ray of his lamp 
fell on their tortured countenances and he would 
say 
Look to Me and be ye saved turn to Me and 
I will release you. 
But to my astonishment though he spoke with 
love as never man spake none would look round 
but all turned their sickly eyes on the dark sky. 
Oh do turn to Him said Pietro He has 
saved me He will save you the boy spoke as 
one would who would say I will tell you what 
the Lord has done for my soul. 
But they would not some sighed and turned 
still more toward the darkness. Some laughed 
some shook their heads sorrowfully and said 
Alas alas! it is too late now some said 
coldly they would not and desired rather the 
bondage of Azrael. Oh to refuse the call of the 
Blessed One! He lingered still among them. 
My yoke is easy and my burden light said 
He. 
Yes but it is a yoke said one. 
My Grace is sufficient for thee said He. 
<pb>
Ay but the way is long and the conflict toilsome. 

But there is hope in the end said He pointing 
with His outstretched Arm to the place where 
the heavenly city beamed in lustre from the end 
of the road enthroned in light. 
Oh come said Pietro. 
But none answered and the two went on 
I looked once again but as His footstep trod 
over the last stone of the ruin and the last pale 
ray of light fell on the heaps around I saw Azrael's 
chariot dash in amidst the men and I heard 
his terrible order to his satellites to seize and 
bind hand and foot all who were there and bear 
them to his dismal home. 0 God! how wild was 
the wail which rose into the air. But they two 
walked on. 
With what inexpressible love did Pietro look 
up at the figure which went before him! they 
reached the road the Blessed One turned and 
smiled on the boy. 
Pietro sank upon his knee and caught and 
kissed the proffered hand and as he did so burst 
out in the earnest expression Master I will follow 
Thee whithersoever Thou goest. 
Not now said He not now Pietro thou 
shalt follow me afterward after your probation 
is over and I have tried thy love. 
2* 
<pb>
But oh said Pietro how can I feel sure I 
shall love Thee to the end? When thou art gone 
I shall soon grow cold and careless and having 
no sign of Thy presence may again fall into the 
nets spread by Azrael for the unwary ones. 
Take this said the Guide wear it hide it 
in thy bosom look at it often if it shine brightly 
remember it is a. sign that I love thee and am 
satisfied with thee. If it is dim thou hast need 
of increased care energy and penitence. 
So saying he placed in pietro's hand a jewel 
of the colour of the sapphire. At that moment 
its lustre was dazzling it seemed like a stone 
taken from the walls of the heavenly city or the 
crown of the King Himself. Pietro caught it 
eagerly and gazing on it with rapture pressed it 
to his lips as he did so his tears fell upon it but 
instead of dimming it they made it shine more radiantly 
still. 
On seeing this Pietro cried out with joy and 
looking up he saw Him that stood beside him 
smiling on him with ineffable love. 
Keep it said He keep it till you come before 
the heavenly gate and are passing through 
the Dark Mountains then give it back to Me pure 
and shining and for it I will give thee Myself forever 
and ever. 
Pietro only answered by the expression of his 
<pb>
eye that look spoke more than volumes I shall 
never forget it. He pressed the jewel to his bosom 
as if no man nor angel nor devil should 
ever tear it from him. 
Oh why may I not follow Thee now? said 
he with an exceeding bitter cry. Entreat me not 
to leave Thee nor to go back from following after 
Thee where Thou lodgest I will lodge and never 
would I leave Thee. 
It may not be Pietro. Farewell! I am ever 
ready to help you when you are in trouble. Call 
Me and I will be always near. But we shall be 
together forever when you have passed the Dark 
Mountains. 
Oh sir when I remember my exceeding weakness 
my recent fall my wayward changeable heart 
oh take me with Thee! 
My grace is sufficient for thee said he and 
as He spoke His hand was outstretched over 
Pietro and He was gone. 
The boy knelt weeping alone. His hands were 
over his face and as he wept he said Oh what 
shall I do without Thee! whom have I in heaven 
but Thee and whom upon earth can I desire in 
comparison of Thee chief among ten thousand 
and altogether lovely! 
As he spoke a hand was pressed upon his shoulder. 
He looked up and Cyril stood beside him. 
<pb>
Cyril said Pietro throwing his arms round 
his neck and kissing him oh Cyril has He sent 
me you? 
Yes dear Pietro yes. He met me on the 
road and said to me Goto Pietro talk to him 
of Me and come together to heaven and 
will we not go together Cyril? Yet 
will you can you walk with one so unworthy 
as I? 
Hush Pietro hush! Blessed most blessed 
thus to be together! 
Oh Cyril that I should ever have offended 
Him! 
Then the two sung together with such sweetness 
and peace as made the wilderness seem to 
blossom as the rose. 
Jesu! the very thought is sweet! 
In that dear Name all heart joys meet! 
Bat sweeter than the honey far 
The glimpses of thy presence are. 
No word is sung more sweet than this 
No name is heard more full of bliss 
No thought brings sweeter comfort nigh 
Than Jebv Son of God most high. 
jesus the hope of souls forlorn 
How dear to them for sin that moqrn! 
To them that seek Thee Thon art kind! 
But what art Thou to those that find? 
No tongue of mortal can express 
No letters write Thy blessedness 
<pb>
Alone who hath Thee in his heart 
Knows love of Jesus! what Thou art. 
0 Jesu King of wondrous might 
O Victor glorious from the fight 
Sweetness that may not be expressed 
And altogether loveliest 1 
All honour laud and glory be 
0 Jesu virgin born to Theo! 
All glory an is ever meet 
To Father and to Paraclete. Amen. 
And they two went on. 
Happy Pietro may I follow thee when I have 
fallen through sin or unbelief may He find me 
and may I at once turn to Him for I know if I 
do He will save me. He needs a penitent and 
willing mind and that is all. Oh shall I ever be 
without that! Jestj thou blessed One the altogether 
lovely grant I may never lack it grant 
that to my soul Thy Name may ever be precious! 
<pb>
CHAPTER ii 
EDWIN THE BRIEF PROBATION. 
The devil is come having great wrath because he knoweth he 
hath but a short time 
Through the vale of lamentation 
Happily and safely passed 
Now the years of their affliction 
In their memory they recast 
And the end of all perfection 
They can contemplate at last. 
So Cyril and Pietro continued on their journey 
the glowing city lay ever before them in its 
beauty. It was their continual delight to look at 
it and converse upon it as they walked for as I 
have read they who love the Lord spake often 
one to another. 
Now as it happened Pietro was the object of 
most incessant attacks. It appeared as if those 
who tormented him would never leave him free 
for though the poor youth had been rescued from 
so many dangers and walked firmly on his homeward 
journey yet he evidently was the aim of 
some wonderful and cruel hostility. You might 
tell him by the shadow which often crossed his 
brow and the anxious look which he wore a 
</div>
<pb>
<div id="the dark mountains;edwin—the brief probation" code="1" wordcount="4715">
sigh would ever and anon escape from him which 
showed how heavy his heart was at times with 
apprehension which Cyril put down to sad recollections 
of the past or misgivings about the future. 
So they two walked on together longing 
to meet at home and to be with Florizel who had 
gone before him. 
Cyril seldom knew these sadder feelings he 
was ever at rest as if he believed more entirely 
in the love of Him who had delivered him and 
whom to know as the messenger continually observed 
to me was everlasting life. 
I often regretted that Pietro could not enjoy 
the same peace and joy and go on his way rejoicing 
too. But I felt sure all was right despite 
his occasional sadness and that he was in the 
hands of One who would without doubt bring 
him home. I noticed too what I had not at 
first that certain trappings which he had worn 
at the splendid banquets at the palace still clung 
to him and these seemed to impede and annoy 
his onward course and I wondered why they 
were not yet entirely smitten off. In fact when 
I saw the two boys I could not help thinking 
often of the passage 
Thy sins and thy iniquities will I remember 
no more I will cast all thy sins behind My 
back Forgetting those things which are be 
<pb>
hind let us press forward for the prize of our 
high calling in Christ Jesus of all this Cyril 
appeared a wonderful illustration. He was 
grieved because He said Lovest thou Me? 
seemed more suited to pietro's sadder state. 
It was early in a bright morning very gay and 
beautiful for that narrow and sometimes deeply 
clouded way. The boys had gone on with comparative 
ease and peace. The dark forms which 
ever hovered around had appeared less often of 
late and the wheel of azrael's distant chariot 
was scarce heard or if heard only as the far off 
sound of remote thunder and wind which boded 
storm. 
The boys had slept the night before as was 
their wont in one of those resting places provided 
by the King for the repose of his own redeemed 
ones and refreshed with their sleep they had 
this morning pursued their journey with renewed 
vigour when as they turned one of those bends 
in the road which they often came to they saw 
the figure of a youth in the path before them. 
He too was on the homeward journey he 
seemed as one who might have neared seventeen 
years of age. His step was light and glad and 
the staff he like all pilgrims held appeared to aid 
one whose step was free. As they approached 
him he was singing. The early morning light 
<pb>
shone on his white dress whose many folds 
gleamed with singular lustre and beauty. His 
dark hair hung around his neck and though he 
was alone he appeared wonderfully happy so 
much so that as the two watched him Cyril could 
not help saying to Pietro 
Yon youth Pietro reminds me of the words 
I h ve read in my scroll Thou shalt keep him 
in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on Thee 
At which Pietro sighed and said a few seconds 
after He does indeed Cyril. 
The youth's feet were bound with sandals and 
on his shoulder he wore the shell of the pilgrim 
wherewith he might take the waters of everlasting 
life which ever flowed within reach of the pilgrims 
of that happy road. 
As they approached him they heard the words 
of his song which was indeed one of those often 
used by the travellers on the road. 
To thee O dear dear Country 
Mine eyes their vigils keep 
For very love beholding 
Thy happy name they weep 
The mention of thy glory 
Is unction to the breast 
And medicine in sickness 
And love and life and rest. 
0 one 0 only mansion! 
O Paradise of joy! 
Where tears are ever banished 
And smiles have no alloy 
<pb>
Beside thy living waters 
All plants are great and small 
The cedar of the forest 
The hyssop of the wall. 
With jasper glow thy bulwarks 
Thy streets with emeralds blaze 
The sardius and the topaz 
Unite in thee their rays 
Thy ageless walls are bonded 
With amethyst unpriced 
Thy Saints build up its fabric 
And the cornerstone is Christ. 
So sweet and clear were the tones of that young 
voice in the morning that it brought tears to the 
eye of Pietro and smiles over the face of Cyril. 
So inspiring were the strains that the two youths 
could not help joining in with them at the end 
which they well knew. 
Thou hast no shore fair ocean! 
Thou hast no time bright day! 
Dear fountain of refreshment 
To pilgrims far away! 
Upon the Rock of Ages 
They raise thy holy tower 
Thine is the victor's laurel 
And thine the golden dower. 
The sound of their voices made the youth turn 
Tound and the appearance of his face only tended 
to confirm the impression they had received his 
eye was dark and piercing and peculiar for its 
cheerful expression. I had reason to remember 
<pb>
that eye in an after day. His cheek was somewhat 
pale and his brow intelligent and pregnant 
with character. His whole appearance was most 
winning. Cyril immediately noticed that he had 
on his forehead that sign which marked him for 
his Lord and which always remained in such 
glowing characters on those who had never left 
the narrow homeward way. 
You seem bound on the same journey with 
us if I may guess by your dress and appearance 
said Cyril going up with an affectionate and confiding 
manner to the stranger. 
A smile of joy broke over his face as he answered 
Oh yes joy indeed if you too are going 
to heaven. I am on that road. 
Then we will go together said Cyril if 
you will. It will be happy to be together it 
will aid us all in our efforts. Where two or 
three as they say are met together there am I 
in the midst 
It was plain that he who had thus joined them 
was of a social nature and was delighted to have 
such companionship. 
What is your name? said Cyril as they 
turned to walk together. 
Edwin said the other such they call me 
and by such shall I be called at the gate at the 
end of the journey I have ever born it. 
<pb>
How long have you been on the road and 
at what point did you enter it said Cyril. 
I was placed in it at the very beginning 
said the other simply and freely and have never 
left it yet. 
A sigh escaped pietro's lips which made the 
other look round. 
Pietro smiled somewhat sadly as he said 
Forgive me if I sighed it was out of keeping 
with the heavenly way but oh Cyril! 
Do not weep said the loving boy did He 
not say He would pardon all and lead you safely 
to the end? 
Yes yes said the other. But Cyril to 
think of having been in the road from the beginning 
and never having left it! What would I 
give 
Nay nay Pietro said the other winding his 
arm around him it is distrustful of His infinite 
and Almighty love to speak so you may not 
indeed you may not you are on the road now 
and are safe quite safe who can harm you? 
Now all this time I noticed that Edwin was unconscious 
of what the two boys were saying of 
him and employed himself with gathering flowers 
which grew in this part very luxuriantly and of 
which he was ever fond in fact I should have 
said he scarcely seemed aware at all of the cause 
<pb>
there was to envy his position. I was much struck 
with this. 
Have you met with any one on the road? 
said Cyril or has any overtaken you? 
Yes I have overtaken some from time to 
time said he and they have sped quickly on 
their journey I have had no time to wait for any 
who walked not fast on for I have had a direct 
summons to be quick and lose no time my King 
wants me and I may not wait. 
Does that cost you no pain no alarm said 
Pietro. 
At this question Edwin looked for an instant 
perplexed and smiled and said No I never thought 
of it in that light I was told to be 
quick and ready and of course I was. 
Yes yes said Pietro right right. I meant 
nothing only I wish 
But he did not finish his sentence. There was 
little doubt what he would have said. Meantime 
Edwin had woven a small chaplet of flowers and 
had thrown it on cyril's brow and laughed and 
Cyril smiled too. 
Did you see aught of a child exceeding fair 
and young said Cyril. 
With long curling locks shining in the sun? 
Ay and I did he was hurrying on most rapidly 
and one who came from the bright city was leads 

<pb>
ing him in his difficult journey and difficult 
enough it seemed for one so young but he bore 
it beautifully. I never saw so fair a child they 
called him Florizel. 
The same said Cyril and he did not go 
any way with you? 
Not a step he was for going fast forward he 
had an urgent message from his Lord and doubtless 
now is safe in the glorious kingdom of that 
I have no doubt. Happy happy child! 
Then Edwin broke out into singing for he ever 
loved to sing and it always was of the heavenly 
home. 
Dear fountain of refreshment 
To pilgrims far away. 
Their conversation by degrees became so engrossing 
of the difficulties of the way and the 
glories of the end that at length Pietro fell in 
with it and the three became absorbed in their 
discussions so much so that they scarcely seemed 
aware of the increased sound in the distance as 
of chariot wheels among the mountains and of 
lorses which galloped furiously and of looming 
darkness in the west which were signs of the approach 
of Azrael. And yet though the sounds 
were portentous and imminent I noticed there 
was a softness in the approach which indicated 
great care lest it might be detected by those on 
<pb>
the road. I did not doubt it was Azrael and 
knowing his hatred for these youths and his determination 
to stop and detain them I felt sure 
that he was in full pursuit of them and I was 
very anxious lest they might be taken by surprise. 
For it was evident he went about as a roaring 
lion seeking whom he might devour. But the 
boys took no notice and were so concerned in 
talking of their home that they seemed to have 
no other thoughts. 
My own alarm was lulled somewhat by not discovering 
that Azrael approached more nearly to 
them. I had not yet learned how entirely this 
was his habit. 
At length night was drawing on and a resting 
place offering itself the three for they now 
made one company retired for rest. They lay 
down on the stone which was raised beneath the 
covering of the retreat and Cyril and Edwin were 
soon asleep. 
I saw Pietro lay long anxiously gazing on the 
starlight which glimmered in the sky and sometimes 
he started as if he heard the sound of those 
wheels which indeed was what he had too much 
reason to know. Nevertheless it was strange he 
did not pay long heed and was soon like the 
others asleep though his slumbers were somewhat 
troubled as if broken at times by dreams. 
<pb>
Scarcely was he unconscious when I was startled 
by the sudden appearance of a dark form 
emerging from the mist which in the night had 
thickened round the road and I saw through its 
haze to my surprise the fiery eye and breath of 
the horses which drew azrael's chariot. It was 
there and his awful figure in an instant was by 
the side of the slumberers. So sudden and rapid 
had been his approach that I was quite unprepared 
for it and imagined he was himself far 
away amid the distant hills. He stood a moment 
gazing with fiendish malice on Pietro. I trembled 
it seemed as if he would bind him hand 
and foot with the manacles his emissaries bore 
with them and take him by force from the heavenly 
road but this I had been told was impossible. 

No one can pluck them out of my hand. 
Simon Simon Satan has desired to have 
thee that he may sift thee as wheat but I have 
prayed for you. Those words were full of comfort 
and even poor Pietro I felt was safe on that 
blessed way. He that keepeth himself that 
wicked one toucheth him not. 
And indeed this was true enough for I had 
scarcely had time to recover my alarm at the sudden 
arrival of Azrael when a soft light burst in 
on the resting-place and shone round the boys 
<pb>
like moonlight resting on marble figures and 
immediately with the light appeared an angel 
move lovely than anything I had ever seen before 
and he took his stand by edwin's side. His 
eye gazed down on the sleeping boy with a look 
of undying love and as he folded his hands on 
his bosom he leaned over the slumberers while the 
glowing light which shone around him gave additional 
beauty to his form. I now wondered what 
would be the result of this meeting. For Azrael 
started and flashed a look of proud and angry 
defiance at the newcomer which showed how 
bitterly he felt against him. 
He seemed perplexed at the sudden appearance 
of the bright messenger in spite of the way in 
which he must have been used to finding such 
ever at hand when he intended any assaults on 
those who were heirs of salvation. 
He passed his hand over his brow as if to summon 
resolution and then turning to his satellites 
who stood concealed in the mist he said Take 
up yon boy and bind him bear him away he is 
mine. 
In an instant one of his slaves emerged from 
the cloud and darted to the side of Pietro as if 
too glad to do his bidding. The boy was fast 
asleep. His hand clasped the sapphire which 
gleamed with purple light. 
<pb>
But ere he touched him the bright one started 
forward. 
Touch him not said hebe is on the 
king's highway he is His and has been bought 
with a price. No one can touch him. 
The slave whose name was Uriel paused and 
looked to his leader. 
He escaped from me said Azrael and is 
my own pledged a thousand times. I will have 
him. 
Thou canst not touch him or hurt a hair of 
his head without the full consent of his will and 
that is not with thee. 
It was a few days since said the other 
and he was forced away from me by the violence 
of another. 
But he consented to go and being brought 
back to the heavenly road no power can take 
him away again none. 
Pietro turned and spoke in his dream. In his 
hand he pressed more closely the sapphire. My 
jewel my precious jewel said he and a smile 
played over his countenance and the angel drew 
more closely to him. 
See there said Azrael beckoning Uriel to 
him in yon boy's hand is a sapphire the King 
gave limit is graven with His name the name 
of Jesus. What would I give to have it! With 
<pb>
out it yon boy is mine again and hath no admittance 
to the Heavenly city no ray of light in 
the last dark passage without that jewel. Get it 
Uriel get it for ten hell kingdoms get it. 
As Azrael spoke he was peering over the 
countenance of the sleeping boy with eager solicitude 
while Pietro lay calmly slumbering and 
smiling at the visions of his dream pressing closer 
his sapphire in his hand with the name of Jesus 
on his lip. 
Uriel approached. But from the other side the 
angel drew nigh too for he did not desert his 
own. 
You must get it from him while unconscious 
or with consent of his will said Azrael. 
Uriel advanced his hand for Pietro had slightly 
relaxed his fingers. In an instant quickly as 
light the angel touched Pietro and the words 
Watch and pray fell from his lips. 
The boy started up. I fancy I see him now 
his eye looked round in surprise. It was plain he 
saw neither angel nor devil there. His dark hair 
floated over his shoulder. He looked at his 
jewel I saw his fingers unclasp he gazed at it 
an instant. His face lit up with joy and the 
blaze of the sapphire was reflected over his countenance. 
He pressed it to his lips and I heard 
him say with ineffable love Blessed Jesus he 
<pb>
laid it in his bosom and folding his hands over it 
he lay down again to sleep. He looked on the 
two other slumberers and soon himself was unconscious 
as they. The angel resumed his place 
by pietro's side. 
azrael's eye passed over the other sleeping 
boys. It rested where Edwin lay. His arm 
overshadowed his face his white dress was drawn 
around him while his pilgrim's staff in the shape 
of a cross Jesus the King had given it him was 
by his side ready to be seized at a moment's 
notice. His feet sandalled rested on the pathway. 
His sleep was full of peace. 
so he giveth his beloved sleep said the 
bright one as he gazed at him watching and 
guarding him. 
Azrael approached the slumberer and he too 
paused to gaze upon his calm face. 
What wouldst thou here said the angel. 
I come to claim my own said the other 
without looking up. 
He is not thine said the gnardian as in his 
voice a tone of triumph rose he belongs forever 
and ever to another. 
Fool said the dark one after a pause I have 
but to make him leave the road and he is mine. 
But he is in the road and has never left it 
yet. 
<pb>
Ha ha! shouted Azrael never and how 
long will that be when I bring to bear upon him 
those temptations before which no young man ever 
failed? No no. He may have belonged to your 
Master hitherto and he is mine now and shall be 
to the end. Uriel come hither. If I cannot secure 
Pietro this young boy shall be so tempted 
that he will be mine. 
No sooner had he spoken than Uriel advanced. 
Uriel said Azrael mark that youth Edwin 
they call him. It is the name I hate it speaks 
of the King. Cause his fall his utter irremediable 
fall thou knowest how before he reach 
the heavenly gate. And if you succeed you shall 
reign with me in hell if yon fail I swear the 
chains of your everlasting torments shall be sevenfold. 

Uriel looked upon the sleeper musingly. 
And mark said Azrael he is young easy 
to tempt and lure from the road. Though he has 
never yet left it he has not the power and force 
in him which yonder Cyril has. He has defied 
me but even he shall fall but as for this Edwin 
he shall be mine mine forever. 
As he spoke he laughed and his laugh rung 
hellishly far away along the border land of the 
road. So terrible was his shout so derisive his 
laughter that I could hardly but believe that he 
4 
<pb>
would succeed. But the sleepers slept on. And 
now suddenly the angel came nearer and drawing 
his hand from the folds of his garment he held it 
over Edwin. 
See this said he as he smiled in heavenly 
triumph see this the King gave it me. When 
yonder sand has dropped its last grain through to 
this lower glass he is safe safe safe. 
So saying he showed an hourglass which he 
held up with a smile of joy and delight such as 
those show who having watched throughout the 
night see the first flush of dawn or having 
dreamed of scenes of terror in the dreams of illness 
wake to gaze on well-known forms and to 
hear beloved voices. The glass contained a large 
quantity of its sand in the lower part but the upper 
portion was dwindling fast out. 
Can you count yon grains of dust said the 
bright one. Count them out and with the last 
one Edwin is safe. See they have nearly all gone. 
If only he keeps on the narrow road till the last 
grain drops through no power of thine dark 
Azrael no effort your satellites can make will 
ever sever him from the object of his love. 
Ha! said the other looking intently at the 
•departing grains and is it so? Then I have 
but a short time aud I must do my work. Uriel! 
•cried he with a voice which might have awakened 
<pb>
the dead Uriel have you studied yon young boy? 
Seest thou yon hourglass 1 His hours are numbered 
and with the last sand grain he enters his 
longed for home. Thou knovvest what I mean. 
It shall be done said Uriel with a determined 
tone do not fear me. 
I do not fear thee said Azrael smiling bitterly 
but I fear the power of the King. 
Thou never usedst to do so said the other. 
Fear not leave him to me. I will bring him 
damned into thy home with the fall of the last 
grain. 
Azrael stood and looked on the sleeping youth. 
He then turned and uttered a cry. It sounded 
far and loud and long and was terrible enough 
to have startled hell. But the three slept on only 
Pietro turned in his sleep and knit his brow and 
sighed as he folded his hands on his bosom. But 
the cry of the awful leader had summoned a multitude 
of figures round the slumberers and specially 
round Edwin. Their fiery eyes glared upon him 
and their hideous faces peered terribly over his 
figure. And a cry loud mournful and triumphant 
rose to heaven 
He is ours! he is ours! he is ours! By the 
lusts of youth and the vanity of life by the 
looseness of the tongue and the dalliance of the 
<pb>
temper by the restlessness of youth and the 
fickleness of affection he is ours ours ours! 
And they laughed again. The very air seemed 
full of them as they crowded and jostled each 
other to and fro and appeared to occupy the small 
space with their turbulent company. 
But all the while that lovely one stood still and 
with his hand holding the glass he watched over 
Edwin. The soft light never left him but fell in 
gentle lustre on the sleeper. I never saw a face 
so lovely as edwin's as he lay unconscious of the 
strife around. Indeed it seemed as if he knew 
and recognised the seraph which gazed so calmly 
and full of love on him. They two appeared to 
belong to each other and to understand one 
another by some medium I knew not of. Then I 
remembered these words and they seemed to have 
their application here 
I will manifest Myself unto thee and not 
unto the world I know My sheep and am 
known of Mine My sheep hear My voice 
I love them that love Me and those that seek 
Me early shall find Me. 
I was so taken up with the vision that I did 
not notice when I looked up again that all the 
dark ones had fled away and the three sleepers 
were alone with the bright one. I turned and I 
heard the rolling of wheels chariot wheels among 
<pb>
the hills. I saw afar off azrael's chariot like a 
dark speck fleeing away and Azrael I saw as 
he directed his wild horses into the dark while 
morning gradually and sweetly was breaking on 
the other side. All the other figures were gone 
and I wondered with trembling yet full of hope 
how in the short time he would be able to do 
his work. 
But as I wondered I looked toward the heavenly 
city which they called Home and I 
could see clearly written on the walls as in letters 
of fire 
I am confident of this very thing that He 
who hath begun the good work in you will continue 
it to the end and I felt comforted. 
I looked again at the sleepers they were alone. 
The bright one too had departed I doubted not 
to bring aid from the city of the King. I thought 
I saw this creature of unearthly light as he moved 
in majesty and silence onward toward the land 
of strength and rest. 
Oh happy happy slumberers! so peaceful! 
So He giveth his beloved sleep! What trial 
what sorrow what pain would I mind if I might 
sleep secure upon the narrow road! It is not 
unnatural nay it is right Pietro should remember 
the past with sorrow and should not feel so 
free as Cyril and Edwin nevertheless he is safe 
4* 
<pb>
safe on the road and what is there not contained 
in that word 1 He has told him Thy sins and 
iniquities will I remember no more. 
Say that to me oh thou glorious one and I 
will bear anything thou wilt place upon me. 
Happy slumberers! with your pure white garments 
indicating the inward purity of your subdued 
hearts with heaven growing daily clearer 
before you with the Everlasting Arm around 
you with His Love set upon you! I will follow 
you on your glorious way convinced that no 
weapon formed against you can prosper and 
that though Azrael marshal his force in the 
distance none can pluck you out of your 
father's Bosom. 
<pb>
CHAPTER iii 
THE TESTS OF LOVE. 
For ua he preaches and he prays 
Would do all things would try all ways 
By words and signs and actions thus 
Still seeking not himself but us. 
Lovest thou Me? Yea. Lord Thou knowest that I love Thee. 
Cyril cried Edwin as he started from his 
sleep it is morning rise let us be going there 
is no time to lose. 
Cyril was in a moment roused. Ay it is indeed 
day and I should have slept on had you 
not been here to call me. Up up and be 
going. 
Oh I have had such dreams tonight said 
Edwin such angel visitants seemed to come 
and visit at my pillow! Oh Cyril! oh Pietro! 
so lovely! Sweeter forms than I am willing so 
soon to part with. 
Pietro gathered his garment around him and 
treasuring his jewel in his breast set out on his 
journey. 
But Edwin had gone. Come quickly come 
</div>
<pb>
<div id="the dark mountains;the tests of love" code="2" wordcount="2890">
quickly said he as he moved on with alacrity. 
We may not stay every moment is loss while 
we linger. 
As he spoke he had turned a corner of the 
narrow road. Before him lay each hour nearer 
the heavenly city. He had never seen it so 
clearly before and he rested leaning on his staff 
and his eyes were fixed in wonder. It came out 
to him like clear shining after rain. As he looked 
he smiled. But we cannot retain these silent impressions 
long out of the abundance of the 
heart the mouth speaketh and edwin's voice 
broke out in its young joyous energy 
To thee oil dear dear country 
Mine eyes their vigils keep 
For very love beholding 
Thy happy name they weep. 
Scarcely had his voice ceased when he became 
suddenly aware of the approach of One he had 
not noticed before. If the vision of the city had 
been radiant how inconceivably so was that of 
Him who now appeared before him! He could 
only remember the words he had heard somewhere 

Thou shalt see the King in His beauty and 
the land which is very far off. 
Edwin looked at Him and loved Him. All I 
can speak is from his own description for indeed 
<pb>
I never saw that wonderful One nor could he explain 
why at sight of Him he loved Him. The 
boy would say that at that moment he felt that 
he would gladly give up all all he ever valued 
and cared for to be with Him forever. So much 
so that there seemed to him nothing strange at 
that moment in being alone without father or 
mother home or friend so that he might be with 
Him. All he ever could say when asked to account 
for his love for Him was to say I love 
Him because He first loved me. 
As Edwin stood before the glorious One He 
spoke 
Edwin wilt thou follow me v 
Sir said he I will follow Thee whithersoever 
Thou goest. 
Canst thou suffer for Me? 
Oh teach me how and I will do it. 
Can you give up your present life and leave 
all you have loved? 
Yes oh yes! but give me the power for I 
long to do it. 
Your father and your mother are still on the 
road they are behind you and cyril's associates 
will be the companions of your daily path. They 
love you and you love them. Can you leave 
them? 
Blessed Jestjs 1 indeed if thou wilt guide my 
<pb>
young steps and lead me in the way I will go 
alone with Thee. 
Canst thou go through the dark valley exceeding 
cold and chill f 
Indeed I will pass through it if only I may 
be with Thee. 
Canst thou stand against the terrible assaults 
of Azrael should he come with his fiery hosts 
upon thee? 
Oh yes but I fear my youth and inexperience 
indeed I am not worthy to be called Thy 
child. Cyril Cyril will more nobly follow Thee 
but I I oh I will do all I can against Azrael 
if Thou wilt be with me. 
Edwin said the stranger I have loved 
thee I have called thee I have chosen thee and 
thou hast chosen Me. Follow Me. 
Edwin looked up and the holy One was gone 
but by his side there lay a cross. 
Where oh where art Thou Thou beautiful 
One said Edwin. 
But no answer came no echo not a whisper. 
Some feeling he could not explain made the 
boy desire to keep secret the vision at which he 
had gazed with such intense delight and though 
on most subjects he loved to dwell with fullness 
and unreserve he could not reveal the circumstances 
which had just transpired. He took up 
<pb>
the cross which had been left beside him and 
made it the staff of his future journey. 
Now I saw as Edwin moved on the Deliverer 
came up to Cyril who was also alone. It was 
plainly his object to hold conference with each 
one of the little company separately and to test 
them one after the other by deep inward com 
munings. 
Cyril was sitting at the moment on a stone by 
the wayside reading in his scroll and waiting for 
Pietro who lagged some way behind. The 
shadow of the approaching figure fell upon him 
and he rose. Seeing Him whom his heart loved 
and on whom every hope depended he fell upon 
his face and kissed His feet. But He lifted him 
up. 
Cyril I would speak with you said the Deliverer. 

speak Lord for thy servant heareth said 
he. i will take delight in Thy wortl for it is 
a lamp to my feet and a light to my path 
Cyril I would tell you first that I love you. 
The boy again fell on his face and embraced 
the feet of the speaker. 
Oh what encouragement there is in that 
word! Say it again. If I only know Thou lovest 
me where is the object of love I would not give 
<pb>
up? what the pain I would not endure? How 
kind to tell me that Thou lovest me! 
I ever tell My own redeemed ones that I 
love them for the knowledge of that makes the 
rough path smooth the difficult one easy convincing 
them that it is worth while to love Me 
and that if they err and return to Me I will receive 
them that I know their frame and remember 
they are but dust. 
I know it I know it said Cyril but that 
I should be the object of that love that is it 
which delights me. Teach me to know the love 
of Christ which passes knowledge and I need 
no other teaching. 
I will Cyril. But to have My love you 
must love Me and do you? 
Do I? Lord Thou knowest that I love 
Thee. And Cyril was pained and caught hold 
of the mantle of the blessed One. 
Will you bear pain for My sake? 
Ay sir I know not the pain I would not 
the arrows of Sebastian the rack of Agues the 
gridiron of Laurence the lions of Ignatius the 
fires of Polycarp the bleeding wounds of the 
noble boy who died for Thee before assembled 
Rome whose name is born by Thy house of 
prayer all these seem oh grant that I may not 
<pb>
be presumptuous! seem to me as nothing to 
what I could bear for Thee. 
Enough Cyril when thou passest through 
the Valley of the Shadow of Death I am with 
thee. But could you give up those that you love 
for My sake? 
Oh do I not love them father and mother 
and my young brother and my sister names 
blended with early childhood my friends of 
youth. They all pass before me. But I will be 
without them if being without them I am with 
Thee. Yes yes as the star outshines the lamp 
or the sun the star so my love for Thee outshines 
my love for them. 
Enough Cyril. He who loves father or 
mother more than Me is not worthy of Me 
Would you give up your own will for me? 
My will oh my Lord what will of mine 
shall stand against Thy Law? True I am ambitious. 
But take me out of mine own hands 
let all my plans and schemes be foiled let me derive 
no honour from the world let me be forgotten 
unknown unappreciated so as only I 
may have Thy love feel that Thou art with me 
and I am happy how happy no words can say. 
Then too I am conceited think myself superior 
to others. I will go and work the lowliest work 
for Thee. 1 will never listen to my own praise 
5 
<pb>
nor say what may tend to my own advantage. 
Order it so. Let it be so and I will bear it. 
Blessed Jesus only let me have Thy dear love. 
I can say no more it waits for me to put it in 
practice. 
Cyril you love Me when I am with you you 
delight to hear My voice you feel you could die 
for Me when I am near you but when I am 
gone when dark clouds hang down between Me 
and thee when you have not seen my face for a 
long time and Azrael laughs at you and says 
Where is now thy God can you then still 
cling to me and bear up through seasons of desertion 
saying that no power in earth or hell 
shall sever you from Me? Can you gaze after 
me through the mists of doubt cling to Me 
though you see not the Hand you hold call to 
Me though I do not answer commune with 
Me though you hear Me not and follow Me 
though you hear not the sound of My footfall 
nor see its print in the dust? Can you in all 
that say in the night I shall seek Him whom my 
soul loveth? 
Cyril gazed up intently in the heavenly face 
as the holy Visitant spoke. 
Oh my Lord to whom should I go but to 
Thee? Only give me grace and I will follow 
Thee through all this even though the difficulties 
<pb>
and darkness were ten times more. I will never 
give up the pursuit through the most tedious 
passages of the Dark Mountains. Dear Lord 
like as the hart desireth the water brook so longeth 
my soul after Thee. I will seek Thee in the 
night season and listen for the sound of Thy footfall 
even in darkness which can be felt. 
Cyril said the holy One smiling on him 
with love ineffable I know you love Me 
Oh cried the boy falling on his face before 
the speaker say that again! Dost Thou 
canst Thou say Thou knowest I love Thee so 
infirm so weak so miserable as my love is! 
Yes Cyril I know you love Me. But you 
are by nature dependent on the presence and 
conscious presence of the object of your affection. 
Can you bear its removal and continue your devotion? 
That is the question I would test you 
with. Can you still love Me and have you calculated 
the cost the difficulties the many obstacles? 

Cyril was silent and gazed up with an inquiring 
look into the holy visitant's countenance. 
Do you doubt me sir said he with a voice 
which slightly trembled with hesitation. 
Cyril said He I doubt not you love Me 
with your whole soul's affection. But I want to 
test the permanence and persevering power of 
<pb>
that love. I want to see if you have calculated 
ou your difficulty. 
Teach me oh teach me blessed Jesus said 
Cyril and I will learn. Show me the way I 
should go and I will follow it. Give me grace 
and I will follow Thee. But I know I am weak 
oh how weak! 
Cyril Cyril enough. Take this waxen tablet 
on one side is written thine own name on 
the other Mine. Keep it and let it be thy work 
each day to record under My name what may 
glorify Me and under thine what may not glorify 
thyself. Keep it each evening. It is the tablet 
of My honour committed to the keeping of those 
who love Me. Bring it Me complete at the Dark 
Mountain and let it speak of Me it will test thy 
love. I know I can trust you. My grace is 
sufficient for thee. Farewell Cyril till we meet 
forever there. 
And ere Cyril looked up from the rapture of 
his adoration the blessed One was gone. The 
boy seized the tablet. It was of fair unblemished 
wax on the head of one side was the name 
of Cyril on the other Jesus. Underneath the 
name of Cyril was a blank save the words I 
have set My love upon him therefore will I deliver 
him. Under the name of Jesus was the 
<pb>
sentence Made glorious by the profession of 
cyril's love. 
As Cyril gazed on the words he burst into 
tears and kneeling down by the wayside said 
Blessed Jesus oh may I ever daily add to this 
side of the tablet. And here I tell Thee I promise 
Thee I will devote my life to present it 
before men and angels and devils filled up with 
the glory of Thy dear Name. 
I heard him sing 
Jesu the very thought is sweet! 
In that dear Name all heart joys meet 
But sweeter than the honey far 
The glimpses of His Presence are. 
And as he spoke his face assumed a hue of 
such burning love and intense desire after heaven 
that it reminded me of what I had read of Stephen 
the first martyr or the visions of heaven 
revealed to saints of old. He remained with his 
arms outstretched and his eyes uplifted a long 
time and then as the day began to wane he 
folded the tablet in his bosom and Pietro having 
come up they rejoined Edwin and went on 
their way rejoicing. 
I saw them as they walked with their pure 
white dresses and the sun glowing full on them 
before the heavenly city ever shining brighter 
and brighter to the perfect day on either side 
5* 
<pb>
the limits of the narrow way and they singing 
psalms and hymns and spiritual songs Cyril with 
his tablet Edwin with his cross Pietro with his 
sapphire. 
Heaven before them and the world of sin behind 
them. Happy boys! Will you not each 
bear your precious treasures safe to the end? 
Even so vouchsafe it Lord Jesus! 
For some hours not much passed between the 
friends. They proceeded quietly on their way. 
Ever and anon before them small groups of pilgrims 
on the king's highroad met their eye as 
they rose to view and were lost again amid windings 
of the path and far above mounting to the 
skies frowned the giant forms of those dim 
shadowy mountains which lifted their sombre 
brows between them and the city to which they 
went. 
Such are the hills spoken of by the prophet 
Give glory to God before your feet stumble 
among the Dark Mountains 
How much clearer are the outlines of those 
hills today said Edwin I never saw them so 
clear before. Methinks they look very near. 
Near or not said Pietro I tremble to look 
at them. How can you bear to gaze on them 
Edwin when you have to pass them and where 
<pb>
as we have heard such terrible things happen to 
those who traverse them? 
But they are the last of the terrors of the 
way said Cyril and beyond there are no more. 
There is home. 
Home home! said Edwin lifting up his 
hands. Oh happy name what would I not give 
to be there! 
But said Pietro many are lost in the passage 
of those hills and never reach the other side. 
How can you tell but what that may happen to 
you? 
Lost in the passage said Edwin musingly. 
Oh I never thought of that lost in the passage. 
But have I not somewhere heard Precious 
in the sight of the Lord is the death of 
His saints v 
True true cried Cyril and that word is 
enough. He is ever true He never fails. 
I had thought said Edwin of the perils 
and indeed I half tremble at them. But I yet 
will trust in Him who has begun the good work 
that He will continue it to the end. 
Yes happy boys! You will see Him Whom 
your souls love and Who never fails and you 
will find Him find Him among His own who 
having sought Him ever found Him. Tell me 
0 Thou Whom my soul loveth where Thou 
<pb>
feedest where thou waterest Thy flock to rest at 
noon. Oh thou fairest among women go thy 
way forth by the footsteps of the flock. 
CHAPTER iv 
THE CHALLENGE IN THE CAVERN. 
Satan hath desired to have thee that he may sift thee as wheat 
but I have prayed for thee. 
Jesu! the hope of souls forlorn 
How good to them for sin that mourn 
To them that seek Thee Thou art kind 
But what art Thou to them that find! 
Now all this time Azrael was not idle. He 
knew that his time was short and he had driven 
his fiery chariots into those dark hills of death of 
which I spoke but now for there were caverns exceedingly 
terrible wherein he could devise means 
to turn the people out of the narrow road. And 
at this time his whole mind was bent on ruining 
Edwin. Uriel had come to him trembling and 
saying he dared not touch one who was so guarded 
as Edwin. 
</div>
<pb>
<div id="the dark mountains;the challenge in the cavern" code="3" wordcount="3528">
There was a gloomy cave underground. From 
its opening poured out volumes of sulphureous 
smoke and flame. It lay somewhere among the 
valleys which sloped down on the cold northern 
side of the hills of death. 
I was able to see within. Shadowy forms 
crowded and crouched before a high throne which 
was raised in the centre. It was of enormous and 
colossal size its weight seemed to be stupendous 
at least if I could judge from the appearance of 
four figures which were evidently those of living 
beings which supported it at each corner their 
folded arms drawn in tightly over their broad 
chests. The muscles which seemed throbbing 
with anguish were ready to burst from their 
place their dishevelled hair hung in thick masses 
round their foreheads and shoulders wet with the 
perpetual sweat which exquisite torture wrung 
from them their bloodshot eyes were starting 
from their sockets as they stared on the humid 
pavement. The brow of one was firmly knit expressive 
of the keenest pain while that of another 
was open and expanded indicating that 
vacancy which despair and suffering often produce. 

No pity not a ray of compassion could be 
seen in the cold stony gaze of the shadowy spectral 
crowd which gathered round the throne 
<pb>
each seemed absorbed in his own concerns the 
very centre and abstraction of selfishness yet on 
every countenance there was suffering. 
All were expecting the occupant of the throne 
there was a stillness which was terrible. If at all 
broken it was only so by the heaving sighs and 
moans which broke almost involuntarily from the 
lips of the crowds of the cavern. I learned that 
the four figures which leaned for they neither 
knelt nor stood beneath their weight but were 
compelled to stoop the knee without touching the 
ground were four beings who had undertaken 
works for Azrael and had failed they had promised 
to bring four pilgrims of the king's highway 
to azrael's home and service. 
I was told they were pilgrims of no mean distinction 
travellers on whom the King had bestowed 
no small measure of his boundless love. 
I was told that now long since they had passed 
the barrier of the Dark Mountains that they 
walked onward to the heavenly city how that 
they had been accompanied by most glorious beings 
whom the King had sent for their safe conduct 
how that they had born the keenest suffering 
in their struggle. They had come off more 
than conquerors through Him Who loved them 
and gave Himself for them and now they had 
long long ago entered that land of ineffable de 
<pb>
light for which as the hart pants for the watercourses 
they had panted and thirsted. 
Oh Edwin! Edwin happy blessed boy! And 
will you accomplish your journey safely to the 
end? Happy Edwin! the Dark Mountains rise 
before you the shades of a rapid evening are 
closing in. But oh will you pass them all more 
than conqueror will the day break and the 
shadows flee away I We shall see. 
Well it was for the loss of these servants of 
the King whom by the exercise of every conceivable 
wile the messengers of Azrael had in 
vain tried to ruin that they were condemned to 
beas. the throne of this cavern. I was told they 
would bear it forever. I was told that their 
anguish was insupportable and that there were 
countless myriads of those damned ones who ill 
different portions of azrael's vast dominions 
were undergoing similar penalties for similar failures. 
Happy happy those who instead of hindering 
have tried to help the pilgrims on the 
king's highway! 
But there was a stir amid the shadowy troop. 
Each ghastly face looked more ghastly still as a 
glow of lurid light shot in from the end of the 
cavern on their countenances. Each livid eye 
gazed out toward the entrance and the four supporters 
uttered a deep sepulchral groan. I saw 
<pb>
that from every remote corner of the abode there 
peered forth faces which I had not seen before 
which showed me that the very air was peopled 
with them. But a burst of fiery light glowed over 
the dismal palace and Azrael had come. 
The advent of the King caused no small stir. 
The searching faces which were thrnst out from 
every corner every hole and cranny of the melancholy 
abode showed that there was a latent hope 
that some slight remission of their woe would be 
granted and that when he saw their distorted countenances 
he would for an instant melt to some 
approach to pity. But I was told they had done 
this for centuries and that yet never for an 
instant had the slightest touch of compassion ever 
been known to play upon his terrible countenance. 
Still these poor spectres cherished hope 
and as I was assured would do so for a while yet 
until the crash of doom. 
Azrael reached his throne I saw as he ascended 
that the figures that bore it gave a deep 
groan and seemed to flash from their livid eyes 
the most inconceivable scorn and defiance at their 
lord and though their very muscles were starting 
from their place at the least motion given to 
the incumbent weight above them yet that look 
of defiant hatred was unquelled. 
Azrael sat on his throne and there was silence. 
<pb>
Who will undertake to tear a pilgrim from 
the king's highway said he. 
Then I thought I heard a sweet voice though 
none noticed it but I which said None shall 
pluck him out of My father's hand and I was 
comforted. 
In an instant hundreds of voices burst forth 
from every side I will! I will i will! 
I will remit your punishment by many ages 
of less suffering if you succeed. 
A shout of what they called joy rolled up from 
the lost company. 
The prize shall be vast said he there 
mission beyond what I have lately given. He 
is a youth whose time is short and even now 
approaches the Dark Mountains. I committed 
him to one and he flinches from his task. 
Then I heard the heavenly voice again which 
said When thou walkest through the valley of 
the shadow of death I am with thee my rod and 
my staff they comfort thee but no one heard it 
bui. 
This last statement produced electric effect. 
The chance was so much greater of his ruin. 
Every opportunity shall be granted to him 
who shall make the effort every means placed in 
his hand. 
6 
<pb>
The far off voice said No weapon that is 
formed against thee shall prosper. 
But if said Azrael he who undertakes it 
fail I swear he shall become a supporter of another 
infernal throne forever and ever. 
The wretched four laughed and there was 
silence again. 
He is young said Azrael scornfully very 
young and therefore easily won open to the 
shafts of lust and independence scarce more 
than seventeen summers old pliable and easy to 
be led his youth makes him an easy victim. 
I heard the voice which said Lord Thou art 
my trust from my youth. They that seek Me 
early shall find Me and I was comforted. 
He is free and generous openhearted and 
so much so that I consider him an easy prey and 
that it is not needful to press him sore I feel 
sure at any time I could grasp him and make him 
my own. 
Again the voice spoke. 
Because I have set My love upon him therefore 
will I deliver him and set him on high. 
Oh Edwin most blessed assurance! and will He 
be able to keep you? I know that you are 
simple minded and easily led will He keep 
you? 
But continued Azrael I know his time ia 
<pb>
very short and I am determined he shall not 
escape me he shall be mine. 
And azrael's face glowed like a furnace with 
anger and the miserable ones^laughed and the 
laugh rang round and round the vast cavern and 
the echoes of that laugh were taken up again and 
again on and on in ever widening circles and 
the sepulchral echoes of the last were more terrible 
than those of the first and there rose a 
deep down laughter which seemed to come from 
the very bowels of the earth and I heard it was 
from youths who were chained in rayless caverns 
below whom Azrael had made his own and who 
laughed now because they heard the king's assurance 
that another youth was coming there. 
When I saw azrael's countenance I remembered 
having heard it said somewhere He is in 
great wrath for he knoweth he hath but a short 
time and I trembled. 
But again came the sweet accents from afar. 
I will stretch forth My hand against the wrath 
of thine enemies. And My right hand shall 
save thee. 
At this moment a figure advanced from the 
crowd I seldom saw a face so awful so pale so 
Satanic yet there was conscious agony there his 
long dry hair hung in withered flakes across the 
skin of his forehead which was drawn tight 
<pb>
across his skull his lank jaws had but one remarkable 
quality firmness of purpose his tired 
eye stared heavily as if surcharged with jealousy. 
As he emerged from the murky air I started. 
I will do it said he I will pledge myself 
to bring him to your throne along that dark 
road which branches off at the northern exit of 
the Dark Mountains. I will do it for I hate 
him and he clenched his hideous hand as he 
spoke. I tempted him once to sin on the way 
of life he resisted me and I lost my place. I 
hate him. 
I discovered now that there was a continual 
voice which rose like an antiphon I knew not 
whence but it was always ready. They that 
hate the righteous shall be desolate. 
Why do you hate Edwin? said Azrael. 
Because he is pure and still loves the King 
and still has hope I have none. 
The reason is valid said the King it is 
powerful there can be none more so. 
The bloodthirsty man hateth the righteous 
said the voice. 
Remember said Azrael the penalty fail 
and for years forever beneath my throne! nothing 
shall alter that decree no Deliverer can 
enter here! 
<pb>
Oh with those words there came so wild a wail 
that it went to my very heart. 
I know it all I am confident in my power 
said Helicos for that was his name. But what 
if I succeed v 
Your reward shall be great you shall range 
these realms free of your fetters and chains you 
shall have your victim to torment forever. 
I Hurra! hurra! hurra! burst from the lips 
of the challenger. I will bring him here bound 
to your throne. 
Hurra! hurra! was reechoed round the 
cave from every voice of those present as if all 
triumphed in the prospect. 
Stay said Azrael look here. All eyes 
were turned toward the throne the king placed 
before them an hourglass the sand lay in a heap 
at the lower part but little remained above it 
was fast dropping through. See said he 
how fast it falls when the last grain is through 
then young Edwin passes the Dark Mountains 
then if he is not with thee he will be in the Heavenly 
City. 
Never never never! shouted the spectral 
company. 
As they spoke I turned round and saw through 
the entrance of the cave and the vista of smoke 
which curled away and along which I alone could 
t 
6* 
<pb>
see out into the land beyond. The light of a 
lovely morning was shed upon it blue with freshness. 
I saw Edwin and Cyril walking together 
and they conversed as those who loved each other 
and spoke of some kindred hope. Their pure 
white garments shone with dazzling lustre in the 
sunshine and their eyes were fixed on the City. 
They walked on with a quick and earnest step. 
I fancied I heard a voice it sounded like Edwin's 
and it said Oh Gyril dear Cyril! I 
know how weak I am but I know whom I have 
believed and that He is able to keep that which I 
have committed to Him against that day dont 
you think so Cyril? 
Yes yes said Cyril i am confident of 
this very thing that He which hath begun a 
good work in you will perform it until the day of 
Jesus 
Oh Cyril how happy! and I thought that 
as the boy looked up with beaming eyes toward 
his home he broke forth into singing and Cyril 
took up the song arid the sweet accents of these 
two blessed ones came rolling back on my ear in 
most lovely echoes. 
Jesu whenever Thy pardoning eye 
Is tnrned to look on me 
The morning star breaks out on high 
And all the shadows flee. 
<pb>
But the murky smoke rolled oyer the vista and 
I saw the sweet vision no more. 
Azrael was again before me. 
You see the hourglass and you yet accept 
the office? 
I do said Helicos firmly and here I 
throw down my gauge to accomplish your behests 
let him touch it for young Edwin who 
dare. 
And as he spoke he hurled upon the pavement 
a cross which he broke with the violence of his 
gesture. 
I wondered if there were any who out of that 
dark company would take up the gauge for Edwin's 
sake. 
I had scarcely had time to wonder when a new 
and astonishing vision emerged before me. From 
the deepest recess of the cavern a light began 
gradually to radiate. It shone with soft beauty over 
the scene it was like the colour of the 
sapphire and though it was so sweet and subdued 
nevertheless it seemed to pale the lurid glare of 
azrael's torches. 
All eyes were directed to it as if all knew or 
guessed the source from which it proceeded. A 
figure presently advanced clad in light as with a 
garment. The lustre of the figure the stainless 
radiance of its white garments the majesty of its 
<pb>
advancing form the severe but exquisite beauty 
of the eye at once declared him from the heavenly 
land. He advanced into the centre of the cavern. 
And now took place the most wonderful 
scene every countenance around me seemed suddenly 
lit up with a life and energy of expression 
of which I had not thought them capable. They 
all stretched out their hands toward him as if beseeching 
mercy and release but none could speak 
each tongue was tied yet if eyes and gesture 
ever spoke theirs did. All assumed the most 
touching and sorrowful aspect I ever imagined in 
the wildest dream of the midnight. They gazed 
with such longings on the newcomer as to make 
the heart bleed to see it for it was evidently a 
longing which could not be satisfied. No eye 
could weep. I wished they could. To see the 
moving lips of men who strove in vain to speak 
but as we have often seen in the dying hour when 
those we love have tried but could not to utter 
some last request so did these unhappy ones 
strive to speak they stretched out their beseeching 
hands to the newcomer from every corner 
I now saw forms coming out in the same earnest 
entreaty till I really thought the crowds in the 
cave were boundless. But all had one object the 
new visitant. It was as if they had known him 
in days long ago and the memory still lingered 
<pb>
in some unclosed cell of their hearts and it 
needed but the beautiful appearance to bring that 
memory back again. 
But none were able to move toward the stranger 
one step. Was he one who in other days had 
pleaded and his plea had been vain? Was he 
one who had followed and warned and entreated 
but the entreaty had been unheeded? Did his 
form and eye now bring back the memories of 
hope when the form of hope had fled forever? 
longings hungerings and thirstings which were 
strong as ever yet could not be satisfied? Would 
they now have given priceless jewels and untold 
worlds to have followed him across the threshold 
and they could not? Did that light shine from 
the far off shores of the land where hope had set 
like a sinking star? Alas I know not. But the 
eight was pitiful in the extreme. 
One poor fellow in particular a youth of Edwin's 
age close behind me stretched out in the 
most eager manner his hands toward the angel 
while his mouth seemed to frame itself into words 
it could not syllable and his eyes gazed with such 
bitter entreaty as broke my heart. 
It clearly was of no avail for he the beautiful 
one gave no heed. But as the poor creature 
withdrew I thought I never saw so melancholy a 
face and so woeful an eye. 
<pb>
to 
THE DARK MOUNTAINS. 
My eyes were now turned on the angel. He 
took up in an instant the gauge of Helicos and 
turned toward Azrael. azrael's eyes flashed fire 
and indignation but he was unable to resist or 
indeed to move. But he fixed his gaze full on the 
newcomer. 
As the angel rose from taking up the gauge he 
drew from his bosom a glass. 
Here cried he is the term of young Edwin's 
pilgrimage. The King has set His love 
upon him and He has given him but this short 
time these sand grains mark the whole future. 
Watch them. Count them if you can! There 
is the last when that falls through if he is not 
yours he will be forever with the Lord. I defy 
thee in edwin's name! 
The sands were indeed few which appeared 
in the upper part of the glass. I trembled with 
intense desire. Oh Edwin dear Edwin! will 
you then be safe from the hand of these terrible 
foes? 
Dark monarch continued the bright one 
the King of kings dares thee to thy worst 
thou hast thrown thy gauge I have redeemed it. 
So saying he passed forth surrounded with the 
radiancy of that marvellous light. 
A concussion shook the cavern the glare of 
the torches again resumed its predominance a 
<pb>
shriek burst from the now loosened tongues of 
the wretched ones who again returned to their 
dreadful home. 
The bearers of the throne heaved their bosoms 
while a groan burst from them and large sweat 
drops dripped from their agonised brows. 
Helicos! shouted Azrael. The spectral 
form stood out against the glare. Away on 
ihy mission. 
The evil one bowed and he passed away a 
noise like subterranean thunder shook the earth 
all was darkness. I looked round and found myself 
on the upper earth again. Far away was the 
heavenly city glowing in light. There too was 
the narrow pathway leading with all its windings 
to it. There too were the forms of the blessed 
ones. I clearly distinguished Edwin he was 
by his movement as one full of joy and gladness 
of heart and I distinctly heard his voice as he 
suns 
Thou hast no shore fair ocean! 
Thon hast no time bright day! 
Dear fountain of refreshment 
To pilgrims far away. 
<pb>
CHAPTER v 
THE SHADOWS OF DEATH. 
Oh Death where is thy sting? 
Brief life is here our portion 
Brief sorrow short-lived care 
The life that knows no ending 
The tearless life is tltere. 
Oh Cyril! said Edwin one morning very 
soon after I had witnessed the scene I have just 
mentioned I feel so happy so quiet in my 
mind how thankful I am that we entered on this 
peaceful road! 
Thankful indeed said Cyril where should 
we have been had we not been here what thanks 
we owe the King for all His mercy to us! I cannot 
help thinking Edwin that we are drawing 
nearer the blessed home for I have more than 
once seen a shade pass over your face as if cast 
from those dark hills which you know bound 
our journey and they say that they ever throw 
their shadows over those who are first to pass 
them. 
Edwin for a moment looked grave and knit 
</div>
<pb>
<div id="the dark mountains;the shadows of death" code="4" wordcount="13473">
his brow but said immediately Ah well Cyril 
it does not matter if He will take me home it 
may save me from many a future wandering and 
chance of failure. If He that passed that mournful 
barrier guide my path to yonder home I am 
content. Cyril I do not know how it is I should 
feel happy about it for I know I have never been 
able to feel that intense love for Him which I 
have heard yon describe. Ah well but you 
you know were ever His noblest and most faithful 
servant you will stand next His throne. 
But I! oh how happy if I get inside the gateway! 

And tears swelled in edwin's eye and he 
joined his hands as he looked toward the barrier 
of the hills. 
Cyril noticed the shadow deepening upon his 
face. 
Let us sing said Edwin. 
With all my heart said Cyril as our book 
tells us when we are merry we should sing 
psalms and we feel very happy speaking to 
each other in psalms and hymns and spiritual 
songs. 
So they two sung 
Oh happy retribution! 
Short toil eternal rest! 
For mortals and for sinners 
A mansion with the blessed! 
7 
<pb>
Why do you look so sad Pietro? Why do 
not you join us said Cyril to his companion 
who was following silently and with evident depression 
on his countenance. 
Oh I don't know said he I cannot feel 
as you do you know it's all my own fault. 
don't think of me leave me to myself I would 
not mar your joy my past walk you know has 
been different to yours and I cannot view those 
hills so dark and gloomy without shuddering 
I cannot think how you can. 
Well said Edwin perhaps I ought not 
either. I hope I am not presumptuous in thinking 
1 shall pass them so easily. I hope I am 
not aid he anxiously. What do you think 
Cyril? 
Why you know Edwin it is our duty not 
to view that passage sadly why should we? it 
would be casting discredit on the King if we did. 
How the enemy who they say line the ledges 
of those rocks would triumph if we were to 
show fear or terror at facing that gloomy barrier. 
No Edwin no you are right quite right in 
looking forward with joy to the passage. Besides 
•don't yon know where it sayb to depart and be 
with Christ is far better? No no you are 
right. Why think what would they say who 
have passed that barrier in the darkest defiles 
<pb>
before as? You know there are countless passages 
each more gloomy than the other which 
channel those hills all of which break out into 
the plain which lies out before the heavenly city. 
And on the ledges of those rocks are carved the 
names of those glorious ones who have passed in 
before us there is Sebastian who was shot with 
arrows as he passed along those defiles there 
are Polycarp and Ignatius to say nothing of 
those blessed ones who especially gathered round 
our Divine Master and passed through the terrible 
ways of the Rocky Mountains. 
Oh go on go on said Edwin I like to 
hear you talk of them allyou know I sometimes 
fancy I may have ere long to go through that 
barrier and I should so wish to know well of all 
who have passed before me. 
Shall we sit down here? said Cyril here 
on a stone by the wayside which will keep ns 
within view of the Dark Mountains and the city 
which shines beyond them? Let us sit down and 
I will tell you all I remember to have heard. 
Oh yes said Edwin gladly that is just 
what I wish it will give me courage and peace 
of mind. won't you sit down beside us Pietro? 
said he looking up. 
No thank you said Pietro with a sigh. 
I will stand beside you and listen. 
<pb>
So saying be leaned his head upon his staff and 
stood in the position of a listener to what they 
would say while Edwin and Cyril sat on one of 
the stones which the King had placed for the 
rest and refreshment of His own. Before them 
and especially well seen from the part where 
Edwin sat rose the mountains very high like hills 
we dream of. The deep furrows the multitudinous 
windings the dark and dismal caverns 
were terrible to look at. Beyond them far away 
throbbed the light of the heavenly city illumining 
the edge of the horizon Edwin could also see 
them well from where he was more clearly than 
Cyril could. Here the two boys sat with the 
narrow path winding behind and before them the 
portion they had traversed and that they had to 
traverse yet. 
Now said Edwin go on. He sat looking 
before him with a calm and steady eye determined 
to have the shadowy valley exactly before 
his attention while he listened to the narrative. 
He did not notice however a figure which was 
creeping along under the ledges of the rocks like 
a hideous spectre now creeping and then walking 
now stooping and now erect carrying an 
hourglass in his hand of which he ever and anon 
paused to count the grains. Then he would look 
up and gaze toward the boys then he would 
<pb>
shrink into the shade and then emerge though 
he drew nearer every step it was clear that Edwin 
had not perceived him with all his earnest gazing 
at the hills. 
But of that form anon. Edwin was in earnest 
attention to cyril's conversation. 
There said he dear Edwin are the names 
of those happy ones who are safe forever yes safe 
forever. I see your eye kindle with delight I see 
your joy. There is the name of the first martyr 
who fell amid the stones his path through the 
Dark Mountains was rough but brief his figure 
is drawn upon the rock of the short defile through 
which he quickly walked they say that he saw 
through the vista before him the form of the 
Blessed One awaiting him and he felt no pain. 
That glorious one loved him and released him in 
His unutterable love for he gave up all for Him 
youth energy power eloquence friends and fame 
and he so young and those He especially delights 
in. He stands with open arms to receive such as 
those and myriads of blessed ones gather round 
Him to welcome His own redeemed ones to 
heaven. 
Cyril stop it is too much too too happy! 
and edwin's eye beamed with a light which was 
reflected from the far off city. Cyril will he 
love those who patiently gladly forsake all those 
7* 
<pb>
IS 
THE DARK MOUNTAINS. 
things for His dear sake? For if I may if I 
may do it oh Cyril imagine would I not do it! 
Thenarrator leaning his head on his hand gazed 
up in edwin's face and seemed for the moment 
too much wrapped in admiration of his burning 
words to go on. 
Yes yes said Cyril you will indeed be 
happy. and already I fancy I see the form of 
those hills passing like a long evening shadow 
across your brow. 
Pietro sighed. Edwin grasping cyril's hand 
turned to Pietro. Dear Pietro don't sigh we 
are all happy let us be happy together do have 
more faith faith Pietro in his love Who calls us 
home. If a mother expected her long absent 
child and bid him go the way in which he should 
come to her would she tell him a road which he 
could not pass and would she not be there to 
receive him on his arrival? 
Pietro smiled and placed his head lovingly on 
edwin's shoulder. 
And Cyril went on. There too is James 
who was struck as he passed through a narrow 
defile with the sword of the cruel king. There 
is the name of Ignatius who was torn to pieces 
by the wild beasts amid those terrible passes and 
he kept his eye fixed on the light which shone 
from the city and sang as he passed out bleeding 
<pb>
maimed and torn. Then on a ledge of a rock is 
the name of Pancratius who going boldly through 
the darkest chasm was assailed by a panther who 
sprung upon him and tore him in pieces but he 
too battled with the terrible beast right to the 
other side and triumphantly entered the heavenly 
land and was girt with palms the moment he issued 
forth. There is the record of Sebastian who 
was led out into the twilight grove of Adonis 
amid those mountains and pierced with arrows. 
There are the martyrs of Hunneric whose tongues 
were torn out as they marched through because 
they would sing the praises of the King. They 
all are gone to everlasting rest and were crowned 
by our King the moment they issued from the 
valley. 
Oh say no more say no more Cyril I long 
to go. To join that glorious band! to be one 
with them to be allowed to share their triumphs 
and to be counted worthy to suffer for Jesus! It 
is too happy even so come Lord Jesus. And 
as he spoke Edwin started up and girt his dress 
around him as if eager to be gone. Cyril 
Pietro the day breaks let us go. 
When at that moment a man was seen approaching 
them along the path his face too was toward 
the city and he carried his staff in his hand. 
How now young men said he this is well 
<pb>
met for we all seem bound for the heavenly 
palaces. 
That is the object of our journey said Edwin 
trustingly and his eye sparkling with joy. 
Will you accompany us fair sir for indeed you 
too seem like a pilgrim. 
I am such an one you have judged rightly 
said he and I shall be exceeding glad to be of 
your company for hitherto I have been alone 
and sometimes my feet lag when I have no one 
to provoke me to be quick and ready. There 
is nothing like provocation to holiness speaking 
often one to another. 
I like him marvellously well said Edwin to 
Cyril aside. He seems quite of the kind for us. 
Why do you not encourage him? 
Because I somewhat doubt him said the 
other. I do not quite like his being so quickly 
out with it all to strangers. They say the fool's 
heart is in his tongue but the wise man's tongue 
is in his heart and I do not altogether like his 
expression of face it is a little sinister. 
Well said Edwin a little offended as to 
that I thought I had often heard you say out 
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh 

Yes yes true enough but there is a natural 
flow about such waters which at once shows what 
<pb>
fount they come from. I like not his manner now 
for he seems watching us and yet ever and anon 
taking scant looks toward yonder hills as if he 
were on the lookout for something amid them. 
Doubtless he is thinking of the passage he is 
soon to effect as we have been Cyril. I think 
you are too harsh. For my part I like company 
the more the better for mei shall make up to 
him and ask his name. Gentle sir we shall be 
right glad of your companionship to the heavenly 
city. But by what name shall I call you? 
My name said he is Helicos and my age 
as you may perceive by my name the same with 
your own. 
It took some little time for Edwin to persuade 
Cyril to join himself to the company of the 
stranger and when he did he said in an undertone 
to Edwin Edwin beware of trusting him 
yet too much do not give him over much of thy 
confidence time will show. It is not every Demas 
which is a Luke. 
Leave me to myself for that said Edwin. I 
will take care. 
So saying the youths continued their route. 
Pietro had but little to say on this matter for he 
was ever absorbed in his own personal troubles 
and sadnesses. 
It was toward evening and they drew near to 
<pb>
the hills those Dark Mountains which rose higher 
and higher before edwin's eye though less perceptible 
to Cyril and Pietro. They camped for 
the night by the roadside as their wont was and 
having sung their evening hymns about the heavenly 
city and offered their praises and prayers to 
Him Who had bought them with his priceless 
Bufferings they lay down to sleep. In all their 
exercises the stranger participated and lay down 
himself there having wrapped himself in the folds 
of his dress. The moon was shining brightly 
and shed its soft lustre on the edges of the narrow 
road along whose keen dark ridge deep 
precipices fell on either side. Helicos placed 
himself close to one of these edges which overhung 
the plain. All seemed soon asleep. And 
that sweet refreshment which He gives to His beloved 
came to rest both limb and mind. 
When the three pilgrims were in deep slumber 
Helicos slowly moved. First he looked round 
turning his dark stealthy eyes on the surrounding 
group then seeing all were safely unconscious he 
raised himself on his elbow and looked steadily at 
all as if to ascertain if they really slept. All was 
still. He rose higher and sat up but moving so 
softly that not the faintest sound broke the quiet 
of the moonlit path. He now stealthily drew aii 
hourglass from his bosom and placing it on a 
<pb>
stone leaned his face on his hand and gazed intently 
upon it. He started. The sand was running 
quickly out a very few grains remained they 
might be counted easily. My time is short indeed 
said he and he girt his dress around him 
and drew himself to the edge of the precipice and 
leaning over whispered to some one. A footstep 
was heard on the rock below a faint whispered 
answer and all was still. It seemed as if messengers 
were close at hand. The next minute a 
small dark figure was seen to speed rapidly over 
the plain. Helicos eyed it anxiously for a moment 
and then crept toward Edwin. 
And Edwin lay there sleeping wholly unsuspecting 
the cruel foe who lurked so near him. He 
was visited by lovely dreams which seemed to open 
to him the home to which he went dreams 
which brought him the open vision of the future 
and as he saw it he smiled with delight. He was 
as some skyish hill visited all night by troops of 
stars. 
He saw in his dream the heavenly city the 
Dark Mountains appeared on the other side of 
him and rising in the far distance of life. He 
thought he was approaching an open gate he 
thought all conflict was past. Figures of happy 
ones passed him quickly to and fro as if going on 
blessed missions but all looked at him with faces 
<pb>
beaming with love past anything he had ever seen 
before. The light was marvellous so pure and 
soft and lovely yet so full of colour that he imagined 
he had gone down to a mine of jewels 
which represented every gem of the earth and 
each one imparted its own lustre to the general 
glory delighted he walked on. At the gate a 
figure came toward him. Edwin thought he hastened 
to meet him. He loved him he scarce 
knew why and they two met and fell upon each 
other's neck and kissed each other. It was his 
brother who eight years before had crossed the 
shadowy barrier. 
My brother said each to the other. 
The conflict is over now dear dear Edwin 
you are quite safe now. The evil one can never 
tempt you now. He pursued you to the last. 
Your temper will never more be ruffled you will 
feel unutterable peace and joy and love you will 
have your work given you by Jesus. Oh Edwin 
you will love Him so when you see Him though 
your course was short you were called by Him 
that is enough you bore His cross through the 
Dark Mountains and glorified Him there. Some 
glorify Him in one place and some in another 
some at the entrance some on the highroad and 
some amid the dark ravines and have their names 
recorded there dear happy Edwin! But turn 
<pb>
Edwin turn do not only lean on my bosom see 
see the sight which I will show you. 
And Edwin thought that he turned and following 
the direction of his brother's eye he saw 
through a chasm of the Dark Mountains the long 
narrow pathway along which he had come and 
on it he beheld a company and as he looked joy 
illumined his happy face. As he still clung to his 
brother's bosom he cried out Oh my brother 
there is my father he comes this way and my 
mother whom I fancied I saw with me at the 
chasm of the dark hills those who first led us 
and kept us on the narrow road. I know her 
face my mother oh my mother! and you are 
coming too and there are our brothers I know 
them each separately. He whom I saw in vision 
as I passed the Dark Mountains as if he were 
passing before me and went back I knew not 
why but he crossed me in swift return on the 
road. How he loved me as he looked upon 
me. Haste Edwin haste he said Jesus waits 
for you at the other side happy happy boy! He 
has sent me back that I may by more earnest effort 
and more entire devotion aid and bring others 
to the shadowy portal. I go Jesus Thou 
glorious one I go for Thy sake to prison and to 
death Those were his words. I see him there 
and our young brother see his firm and onward 
8 
<pb>
footstep his calm yet earnest eye as if the shadow 
of the Dark Mountains would have no power to 
hurt him. Yes yes he comes my own companion 
in our early schoolboy days. And yet another 
our sister she comes. I fancy now I see her 
cheering each one by her kind and earnest call. 
Now she looks toward us now she seems to see 
the mountains. I see the shadows on her face 
they all look to her she aids them all. Yes there 
they all are our own not one absent not one 
hesitating every instant they draw nearer will 
they not be here presently? Come come you 
dear ones faces I have loved from childhood 
voices which guided my infant step come home 
to us come to Jesus. He is here and we shall 
be all together together forever and ever. Oh 
make haste let not azrael's dark messenger make 
you pause oh our own beloved ones saved by the 
blood of the Lamb! 
As Edwin uttered these last words he imagined 
he stretched out his arms toward the vista of the 
Dark Mountains and as he finished speaking a 
light of powerful radiance bathed the scene. It 
was of every colour as if it reflected the jewels of 
countless worlds. 
In an instant the Dark Mountains became lost 
in an illuminated atmosphere of glory and the 
forms he had been gazing at fading from view 
<pb>
seemed to be absorbed in it. As he was turning 
to see from whence the glory came his brother 
had turned also and had fallen on his face in 
speechless rapture. Edwin gazed an instant and 
he too fell on his face by his brother's side for 
before them stood and he now saw Him for the 
first time The King in His beauty the chief 
among ten thousand and altogether lovely. 
Thou art fair my beloved there is no spot in 
thee may his left hand be under my head and 
his right hand embrace me. 
And he awoke he started up his face was 
toward the city his hands were joined as if in 
ecstasy he had caught the feet of his beloved One 
on his face joy and delight broke and remained 
while his eyes gazed in rapture his dark hair fell 
over his neck in the moonlight he was wrapped in 
the vision. Then a shade of sadness passed over 
his face as if he longed that it might have been 
true. 
Then he burst out as if the King were close 
beside him Oh thou glorious one like as the 
hart desireth the water brook so longeth my soul 
after Thee. Oh only make me Thine and I will 
bear or do anything for Thy sake. Oh my precious 
family and shall we all be together there? 
shall we meet around the King? shall we soon 
<pb>
be there? Oh my brother what will I not bear 
to wake and find that vision true! 
As he spoke and by this time he was kneeling 
with his face toward his home a hand touched 
him it was Helicos. 
What wouldst thou with me said Edwin. 
You have been dreaming Edwin 
Yes oh such a glorious dream! Oh Cyril 
Pietro wake wake and hear the vision I have 
had. Is not this the home of angels v 
Nay nay wake them not yet I ho ve something 
to say to yon. 
Nay but I can tell Cyril all I see and hear 
why should I not? we are companions on the 
narrow road. I will wake him. 
I beseech you do not you will see the 
reasonableness of my request when you hear my 
motive. 
Well said Edwin pausing but casting ever 
and anon an eye of love and longing toward the 
city as if he expected again to see the vision. 
Well go on. 
You seem to have had a dream which pleased 
you. 
A dream! oh yes so glorious! Oh Jesus 
let me go! 
Do you believe in dreams? 
<pb>
I believe that my Lord sends me these beautiful 
visions to aid me on my road. 
Yes but they may be caused by many other 
causes a heated imagination a certain physical 
condition. 
Oh but my dream was so beautiful so true. 
Yes it is all happening it will happen they are 
coming and will soon be here and I shall wait for 
them. for 
them for whom f 
My family those whom I have spent life 
with those who have been the companions of 
my earliest thoughts and first brought me on to 
this road. 
Ay that was the very thing I was thinking of. 
It is something sad that you should go so long 
before them and that they should follow so far 
and so distantly behind why not wait for them? 
My Lord calls me and to be with Him is 
worth priceless worlds. 
What to leave them? Why not all go in together? 
Why not go back or join them or linger 
awhile till they come up? How they would love 
to have you with them! what support and comfort 
you would be to them! what a cheering thing to 
yourself to enter with them through the dark portal! 
Think of them. Have you any warrant 
to think you must and will pass before them? 
8* 
<pb>
No I do not know why but I would not turn 
back now ray face is to the heavenly city for the 
world. Do not press me. 
No I would not on any account urge you 
but I thought you might be hurrying on too 
quickly with the enthusiasm which betokens your 
character. I thought too it might be that you 
adhered too closely to your chosen companions 
Cyril and Pietro. You are young and more 
as I came along I passed your family and they 
spoke of you and wondered you had so far left 
them behind. 
Is it so said Edwin. No no they did not 
wonder they sent me on the heavenly road and 
bid me make speed before them if He would have 
me. They said the Lokd hath need of you and 
straightway they let me go. 
Well all I would urge you to do is to consider 
whether you may not for some reason or 
other be precipitating this matter that is all 
for besides this it seems to me presumptuous to 
hurry on so quickly. How do you know your 
Lord will have you? you have had falls and 
have stained your garment often. I should have 
thought that more time would have given you a 
greater opportunity of getting pardon at least 
of making it sure. 
Edwin sighed. True said he I know 
<pb>
that but still I lore my Lord and I have never 
consciously left Him and I believe in his boundless 
love. 
Well but can you trust to that? The Dark 
Mountains form a terrible passage exceeding awful 
and they say that once in them there is no 
return and as we enter them so we must come 
out and there is no second chance. Now I love 
the King deeply and long as well you to enter 
His glorious kingdom but still I would not go 
so hazardously as you seem to be going. I don't 
know I may be wrong but you of course have 
reasons for all you do. They tell me that those 
who pass those defiles inscribe on them the work 
they have done for the King now you seem 
young and as I came along I found but little recorded 
of what you had done for Him. I know 
you love Him and long to serve Him. Still is 
that enough? Cyril who sleeps yonder has done 
more much more he has had larger opportunity 
you want more time more time then all will be 
well. But however you know best. 
Poor Edwin how your dream with its forms of 
ineffable loveliness is fading away! How quickly 
that vision is fleeting into air! He looked or 
rather started at the speaker. The moonlight 
shone on Cyril and Pietro the hills rose grimly 
before him the glow over the city seemed to be 
<pb>
fading out his hands convulsively grasped the 
cross which he ever bore onward to the heavenly 
home his eye was fixed a moment with a look 
of doubt then suddenly relaxed into a gaze of 
bewildered despair. 
Oh sir what do you mean? 
The anguish of that cry rang along the pathway 
and sounded off into the wilderness and the 
sad echo seemed caught up by voices far away 
which scoffingly laughed in return as if distant 
multitudes were in triumph triumph over the 
expected ruin of a soul! 
What do I mean? oh nothing nothing. I 
only wished to caution you but I must be going 
for the night is far spent. If you had been 
willing to bear me company or to have given to 
my charge your cross to bear to your family as a 
memorial that you were waiting for them it had 
been well. 
And Helicos rose to go though had any one 
been there to watch his eye they would have seen 
such a subtle triumph lurking there as would have 
wrung their hearts with anguish and sorrow past 
words. 
Oh stay sir kind sir stay one moment what 
shall I do? I have done but little for my King 
my life has been so short my passage of the narrow 
road has been so brief oh sir but I do love 
<pb>
Him love Him! I long to be with Him. I 
saw Him in a vision last night and He was altogther 
lovelyhe seemed to accept me I think 
I feel sure He did. 
Ay! in a dream. 
Yes a dream is there nothing in a dream? 
Does not He give them to us to draw us to Him? 
Oh my Saviour Jesus have I then so loved 
and am I not to see Thee am I unworthy to approach 
Thee? Yes yes I know I am I knew I 
was yet my heart desireth Thee as the hart desires 
the water brooks. Why sir but seventeen 
summers have shone on me since first I entered 
on this road and how could I have done with my 
poor weak power a work such as Cyril has done 
or those gifted with noble talents? What shall 
I do do tell me. You are kind you understand 
my feelings tell me what to do. 
Well I was in a hurry to be gone but I will 
wait a few minutes. I should advise you to pause 
ere you enter the Dark Mountains stay till your 
family join you they are behind why should you 
not longer enjoy your sojourn with them? why 
so soon leave it all leave them all? So doing 
you will have more time to do works which will 
be inscribed on the memorial stones of the journey 
and on the rocks of the dark defiles. That 
is what I shall advise. Give me your cross it 
<pb>
is beyond your strength to carry it is presumption 
to try it. Take this polished staff instead 
many have handled it on this road Jacob Hezekiah 
Peter all have used it. 
What shall I do said the poor youth. But 
he did not think of applying to the king's messengers 
he had bncome too self dependent too much 
inclined to trust to the feelings excited by his 
visions and his hopes. 
Below the edge of the narrow road there was 
a series of paths utterly dark. Here hideous 
forms would flit to and fro ever waiting to catch 
some saint of the Lord who might slip from the 
path and eager to lay traps and snares by which 
they might be caught or hindered on their heavenward 
journey. The night seemed to be one of 
especial jubilee among these satellites of Azrael 
for all through it might have been seen troops on 
troops flitting across the plain toward the road 
and now they had established a direct communication 
with Helicos. 
How is the glass said one the sand? 
Fast running out but a little more and all is 
over. 
Has Helicos succeeded 1 does the boy hesitate? 

Yes admirably he pauses and yet the King 
has sent for him to enter the dark ravine. If he 
<pb>
has not entered it before the last sand grain 
drops through all is lost and he is tmrs ours! 
ours hurrah! 
And Helicos? 
Has a vast reward. 
Ha! but if he fail v 
He cannot he must succeed the time is so 
short. 
Yes but the King will make great efforts to 
save him for they say He has set His love upon 
him. 
Ah well I feel faith in Helicos: imagine 
the stake the awful punishment the great reward! 

True we shall see. But see here comes 
Helicos and the youth with him watch watch 
the sand keep your eye on the slippery sand. 
When the last grain has dropped through all 
hell shall echo with a jubilee and we will bear 
the damned one away in triumph to his long 
abode where he will be one of the gibbering 
spirits who shudder round the terrible caverns. 
But see here comes Azrael. 
At this moment a dark chariot was seen drawn 
by four sable horses who were coming on at 
a furious rate. In it was the figure of Azrael 
leaning forward directing the chariot toward 
the narrow road. Behind him was the red light 
<pb>
which glared in the extreme distance. The king 
of terrors drove furiously through the groups. 
Has he got him is the boy mine? 
The sand is almost out said one. 
Ha! it is well. Helicos shall have his reward. 
See here he comes. 
Step lightly there. Now we shall be off the 
road in a few moments and in the by path by 
which I shall be able to conduct you quickly to 
your family. It is a short way. The path is 
dark but I will lead you safely through. I know 
it well. There keep my hand tread lightly 
take care. 
And Heljcos appeared conducting Edwin by 
the hand along the edge of the narrow road. 
The glass the hourglass! watch it well. 
Tell me as the sand drops through. Oh for a 
triumph over the King! How I shall rejoice to 
do it said Azrael as having alighted he crept 
near the edge of the precipice on the height of 
which the narrow road hung upon which the 
figures of Helicos and Edwin were standing. 
Edwin! oh Edwin! and can you be so near 
and yet after all have you come but to return? 
The light beyond the Dark Mountains grew 
brighter a ray shot through the shadowy ravines. 
Another moment and the form of a heavenly 
messenger appeared. He bore a message from 
<pb>
the King. The hourglass was in his hand. He 
came quickly as if in search of one who must be 
ready at the call. He reached the spot where 
Cyril and Pietro were first aroused from sleep 
and were beginning to set out on their homeward 
journey. 
where is Edwin? 
I know not said Cyril He was here last 
night when we lay down to sleep. 
The King has sent for him to pass the Dark 
Mountains immediately. 
What! so soon said Cyril. 
Yes his place awaits him in the heavenly 
city. He has a work to do there. 
Then he is safe safe forever said Pietro 
with sorrowful yet unrepressed delight. 
Not till he has passed the last barrier of 
yonder hills his last and worst trial. 
Is he safe then? said Pietro. 
If when the King sees him He accepts him 
said the messenger. He will meet him at the 
other side. 
Oh happy Edwin said Pietro as he looked 
toward the hills. 
But where is he said the messenger. 
They looked but he was jiot there. There 
was the place where he lay but he was gone. 
Each moment is precious said the angel 
9 
<pb>
the sand runs through the glass and if he be 
not at the mountains as the last grain falls all is 
lost for Azrael wins his gauge. 
Oh Edwin! Edwin! cried both his companions. 

Edwin! cried the voice of the bright one. 
But the name of Edwin echoed far and sadly upon 
the wind of the surrounding deserts. 
He was gone. 
A voice uttered in an exceedingly bitter tone 
now struck upon their ear in one of the pauses 
of their own lamentable call and its words seemed 
to be like this 
Tell me 0 Thou whom my soul loveth where 
Thou art where Thou makest Thy flock to rest 
at noon for why should I be as one that turneth 
aside? 
The cry was most mournful as of one who had 
lost his way and longed to return. Then came 
wild tumultuous voices. 
This is the way here lend me thine hand. 
This is the short way back to the narrow road. 
This way nay this! 
Then rose a fourth voice which cried i have 
all but won I have plucked him from the bosom 
ofthe'king! Ha! ha! 
It is Azrael said the angel. 
Then again arose that distant cry. 
<pb>
Oh Thou that art in the clefts of the rock in 
the secret places of the stairs let me see Thy 
countenance. Let me hear Thy voice for sweet 
is Thy yoice and Thy countenance is lovely. The 
beloved of my soul has withdrawn Himself and 
is gone. My soul faints. I seek Him but I 
cannot find Him I call Him but He gives me 
no answer. 
Oh said Cyril it is edwin's voice the 
tempter is drawing him away. I knew I knew 
that that Helicos was a deceiver and edwin's 
simple trusting temper was deceived. Oh sir 
can nothing be done? Save him he ever so 
singly loved the Lord. Surely he cannot cry so 
in vain? 
Most true said the angel pausing. No 
He has set him as a seal upon His breast and as 
a seal upon His arm. His love is strong as 
death. Many waters cannot drown His love 
neither can the floods overwhelm it. 
Oh words of unspeakable comfort! said 
Cyril. 
But see who is this said Pietro and he 
looked toward the Dark Mountains. 
One was seen coming alone. It was One whose 
garments had been dipped in blood. Around 
Him was a soft light like that of stars. He 
came quickly. His eye looked onward past 
<pb>
Cyril Pietro and the messenger and was fixed 
on the spot from whence the bitter cry had 
come. He passed by swiftly like one who had 
a mighty mission and was bent on accomplishing 
it. 
As He went by Cyril and Pietro fell on their 
faces and hid them in their hands and lay in 
the dust. And they said in a low undertone It 
is He! 
Then rose a voice which broke like music on 
the ears 
I am the Rose of Sharon and the Lilt 
op the Valleys. My heart waketh. It 
is the voice of My beloved that knocked. 
I AM his and My desire is toward him. 
He had passed on. 
Cyril rose. Pietro it was Jesus. He is 
seeking Edwin. How beautiful were His feet on 
the mountains. 
There was a silence. The two youths leaned on 
their staves. Afar off other groups were approaching 
the spot. All appeared to have seen 
the King go forth in His beauty. 
The stillness was presently broken by the 
sound of voices. Edwin had but set one foot 
off the path. He had retained his cross had 
he yielded it would that glorious One have gone 
<pb>
down and sought him? Azrael had seized his 
arm. 
Mine! mine see the sand drops through! 
No no cried Edwin I am not thine I 
am bought with a price. My King Thou whom 
my soul loveth how have I tried to love Thee! 
and where art Thou now? 
A thousand hideous faces glared from below 
the precipice. Helicos whispered in his ear. 
The light as of the day star after the deepest 
night broke upon them and He appeared. In 
an instant all eyes were on Him all tongues were 
silent. 
Edwin turned and looked on Him. Never 
when the sun of morning smiles on the vernal 
earth does it look so lovely or find so beautiful a 
response as then did edwin's countenance light 
up with joy unutterable. He stretched out his 
hands toward Jesus while every finger of the 
damned ones which had touched him fell powerless. 
Azrael shrank back gnashing his teeth with 
rage. Helicos like a spectre disappeared in the 
darkness. 
Edwin said the King will you come with 
Me v 
Oh sir said the happy boy where Thou 
goest I will go where Thou lodgest I will 
9* 
<pb>
lodge. I will follow Thee whithersoever Thou 
goest. 
Then follow Me now. Thou hast never left 
Me. You are Mine. 
And Edwin stood free disenthralled and 
emancipated by the side of his Divine Master. 
And they two went on. 
Sweet voices accompanied their passage which 
said words like these 
He brings him to His banqueting house and 
His banner over him is love. His left hand 
is under his head and His right hand upholdeth 
him. 
And it was so indeed for Edwin looked as if 
he never more would leave that Friend again. 
He seemed to notice no one but he only clung 
to His side and his eyes were fixed on Him. He 
passed Cyril and Pietro without heeding them 
and yet it was from no lack of love that they 
knew right well for he ever loved them since he 
joined them. No it was that he was about to 
enter the Dark Mountains and he dreaded lest he 
might for an instant lose his sight of the King 
lest in any pains of death he might fall from 
Him. As he went by they heard him saying as 
if communing with the Blessed One My Beloved 
is mine and I am His until the day break 
and the shadows flee away. I have found Him 
<pb>
whom my soul loveth I hold Him and I will 
not let Him go. Oh knit my heart unto Thee. 
And He the glorious One turned and smiled 
on Edwin and saidi will never leave thee 
nor forsake thee. When thou walkest through 
the Valley of the Shadow of Death I am with 
thee. And they two went on. 
Then Cyril and Pietro broke forth into the 
words of a hymn I have somewhere heard before 
for their hearts were overflowing with gladness 
and they longed for the day when they should be 
with Him forever and ever. 
Lo the winter is past the rain is over and 
gone the flowers appear on the earth the time 
of singing of birds is come and the voice of the 
turtle is heard in our land. The fig tree putteth 
forth her green figs and the vines with tender 
grapes give good smell. Arise my son and come 
away. 
<pb>
CHAPTER vi 
LOST AND FOUND. 
k I have gone astray like a sheep which is lost. Oh seek Thy 
servant for I have not forgotten Thy law. 
Faint and weary Thon hast sought me 
On the cross of suffering bought me 
Shall such grace be vainly brought me? 
And they were gone they two. Cyril and 
Pietro were again alone. The dear companion 
of that brief period of their pilgrimage had gone 
from them his day was breaking and the shadows 
fleeing away. 
Edwin was with his Lord the object of his 
longing desire. Presently they were close beneath 
the shadow of the mountains. Edwin followed 
close behind Him. He trod in His footsteps 
and felt safe. He seemed to dread losing 
Him for a moment. With Him he felt safe quite 
safe and who would not be his left hand 
is under his head and His right hand doth embrace 
him. 
The wind now blew exceedingly cold so much 
so that Edwin grew pale and drew his garment 
<pb>
closer around him it was the garment the King 
had given him when he first entered on the road 
and he had done what few do he had never lost 
it it was the same from the beginning the same 
bright spotless garment his own baptismal 
dress. 
The blast from the hills blew on edwin's face 
and parted his dark hair. 
It is exceeding cold said he. 
Yes said his Guide very. But I am with 
thee and for thee I spent that night in Gethsemane 
and the night was cold this cold is part 
of the acts of thy dying and of Mine. 
It is enough oh is it not if Thou hast born 
it before me said Edwin. And they two went 
on. 
I shall not be close to thee all through this 
passage said He but I shall be ever within 
your sight even in the darkest part and you can 
keep your eyes on Me if you will. 
If I will! said Edwin. Oh Thou who 
art the guide and guardian of my way Whom 
have I in heaven but Thee and who upon earth 
that I can desire in comparison of Thee I 
will ever look on Thee for then I am happy and 
fear and care for nothing. Star of my course! 
Sun of my sky! open Thine eye upon me and I 
shall be satisfied. 
<pb>
At this moment a thick cloud rolled up just at 
the entrance and so enveloped the whole scene 
as to shut out the view of Him who went before 
from edwin's eyes. He cried out for fear besides 
which there were terrible cries and howlings 
of wild beasts and dark birds of the night which 
sailed with sable wings over his head. And then 
too he felt sure he heard the voice of Azrael from 
out of the dark and he trembled all over and felt 
sore afraid. He stood awhile and looked back. 
There he could see the long narrow path with 
all its windings and byways stretched out behind 
him. It seemed to go down a steep hill 
he never knew till then he had been coming up a 
hill it had often seemed so pleasant and easy to 
him. He could see all the way stretched out behind 
him and groups of figures approaching. 
There were Cyril and Pietro there were his 
family his beloved ones as he had seen them in 
that lovely dream. 
He stood gazing when a voice spoke What 
dost thou here v And he turned round and 
entered the cloud. He shuddered the darkness 
could be felt and the piercing cold searched him 
to his bones but obedient to the heavenly voice 
he went on and ever bore his cross his rough yet 
blessed cross before him. He had scarcely entered 
the depth of the mist when a light pierced 
<pb>
the cloud and he saw the figure of One walking 
quickly and toward him. 
The form was not unaccustomed to his eye. 
It seemed like home in that ghastly and mournful 
realm where silence and solitude seemed to 
reign in undisturbed dominion. And now that 
He was gone Whose form alone could cheer the 
dreary scene and whose Voice was the only accent 
which could shed gladness on the desolation 
the figure of any of human mould a companion 
through those melancholy valleys was indeed a 
relief. He stood looking at the coming stranger. 
Would he turn back with him and really accompany 
him through the remainder of his sojourn? 
Why was he returning? Another moment and 
they stood face to face and he fell upon his 
brother's neck and wept. 
Oh my brother! my one companion of dear 
happy days on life's narrow road! whither are you 
going? Have you come back to go with me and 
shall we together pass the last dark defile? Shall 
we together pass the shadowy portal and enter 
the golden gates? My brother! thou whose 
strength in childhood ever bore up my weakness 
and whose voice cheered my halting step come 
with me let me lean on thee it is so cold and 
lonely! 
Edwin my brother Edwin! No I am re 
<pb>
turning to the narrow road. When I had more 
than half passed through these deep defiles I 
met Him Whom my soul longed for Him Whom 
I had tried to love. Edwin He looked on me 
with such love and He and I stood alone together 
in yonder valley. Did not the wilderness 
seem to blossom as the rose while He was there? 
It had seemed so lonely and melancholy befpre? 
such pale forms fleeted past ghosts of past acts 
and hours and more than once young Edwin I 
thought I never should bear up through the valley. 
Then I remembered His promise when 
thou walkest through the valley of the shadow of 
death I am with thee I knew His promise was 
enough and though I saw Him not I felt sure 
He was somewhere behind the folds of those dim 
mists. But when I saw Him and He spoke to 
me then faith melted into sight and hope became 
perfect peace. He seemed to say I am the Rose 
of Sharon and the Lily of the Valley as the lily 
among thorns. I sat down under Him with great 
delight. He brought me to the banqueting room 
and his banner over me was love. 
Urban my brother go on tell me more. 
Shall I see Him? Will He be there to meet me? 
And edwin's eye kindled with rapture at the 
thought. 
Yes that He will. He loves you Edwin and 
<pb>
do you think He has brought you hitherto to leave 
you iu your last extremity? Oh no! He will 
never leave you nor forsake you. 
Urban how comforting! The valley of death 
seems when viewed thus like the land of Beulah. 
To me then to die is gain since even destruction 
and death say We have heard His fame 
Oh Jesus surely in what place Thou shalt be 
my Lord and King whether in death or life even 
there also will thy servant be. But Urban why 
didst thou return? 
Edwin He sent me back He said He had 
need of further work for me that he had brought 
me there only to try my love to Him and to reveal 
Himself to me as only He can in the silence 
of these dark valleys. He told me He had a 
great work for me to do to extol and glorify 
His glorious Name. He said to me that I was 
to devote every moment of my restored life to 
Him and to bring on upon life's narrow road 
our beloved family. And Edwin He gave fne 
hope and lovely visions of all all of us being ere 
long together with Him and He said that by my 
earnest devotion to Him by my consistent life 
by subdued impetuosity by affections and love 
all of which he bid me borrow from Him I was 
to bring them and others to Him. And as He 
spoke of my restored life on the way of proba 
10 
<pb>
tion He bid me turn and behold upon the wall 
of rock a light like moonlight fell and as it 
strayed across I saw the name of Sebastian there 
and I knew it was one of His own His glorious 
saints who like me entered the dark valley and 
returned to enter it ere long again and He said 
to me he is one of Mine as a jewel in My crown 
as one of My own forever. Edwin how those 
words sounded in my ears One of My own forever 
And He said Sebastian won his crown as 
He now bid me by going back to live and die 
for Him. And will I not oh Thou glorious One! 
Will I not live for Thee and devote my every 
power to Thee never count my energies or youth 
as mine but Thine bought with a price to work 
for Thee forever. No not my own! Edwin He 
called me His own beloved one and I fell at 
His feet and worshipped and when I looked up 
He was gone. 
Urban paused a heavenly light illumined his 
countenance. It was a sight of unusual beauty 
to see these two brothers the one waiting to go 
forward to the heavenly city the other to return 
for a brief space to the narrow path of the holy 
life. 
Then farewell beloved happy Edwin my 
own brother! Young you are to enter your rest 
•but'so He giveth His beloved sleep Edwin 
<pb>
ll 
you will soon be forever with the Lord far beyond 
the reach of temptation and change of sorrow 
or infirmity. Farewell happy Edwin till 
we meet all together before the Lord. 
Then Urban are you going away? Shall I 
go alone quite alone through the dark valley 
and will not you return with me? 
No Edwin He bids me go back. Fear not 
He will be with you and will carry you safely 
through to the happy land. Nay weep not my 
brother for Edwin had begun to weep we 
shall meet again ere long. 
Yes yes Urban I will not weep why should 
I? I have reached my wished for end and I joyfully 
go. But all of you follow me let none be 
absent not one. If He has sent you back and 
bid me take your place do His glorious work 
you are able to do it far more nobly than I. 
You will be again my brother in that bright 
world in places where I shall gaze up to thee 
and admire thy unsullied loveliness so far beyond 
my own. You have a work to do for Him I 
could never do. Go and do it do not pause 
however hard it be. 
<pb>
CHAPTER vii 
THE LENGTHENING OP THE SHADOWS. 
And they came to Jordan and Joshna said Sanctify yourselveb 
for tomorrow the Lord will do wonders among you. 
0 bright and ever beaming tree 
In more than royal purple dressed 
How great thy glory that on thee 
Those Holy limbs should find their rest. 
At this moment a tumultuous wind rolled up 
the valley and with it came voices which called 
Edwin away many voices but they all belonged 
to the king's cause. At the same moment there 
was a sound of chariot wheels rolling among the 
hills as of a great host advancing. But they 
came from every side as if there was no portion 
of the surrounding country which was not open 
to some terrible concussion. There were wild 
cries mingled with the noise of these chariot 
wheels. It was Azrael who had released some 
of his agonised captives under the promise that 
could they stop Edwin and hinder his allegiance 
to the Lord ere he passed through the last barrier 
they should be free. 
<pb>
Edwin turned pale very pale a deathlike hue 
spread over his countenance and the drops of 
sweat hung like beads upon his forehead. 
All was in motion. It was azrael's worst and 
last attack. 
Oh Jesus may I from no pains of death fall 
from Thee! 
Edwin looked round. Urban was gone some 
messenger had beckoned him on he might not 
linger. 
And he must go on too. He was alone. The 
rolling of those chariot wheels became more terrible 
every moment. He sometimes paused to 
listen and then moved on but very terrible was 
each step he took for the darkness became iu 
tense even so as to be felt. He trembled 
thousands of forms fleeted and rushed before him 
every chasm and ravine was full he became bewildered 
he forgot the past in the future. The 
darkness became deeper and deeper the lonely 
figure appeared too solitary to pass safely through 
such a conflict. The object of Azrael was to hinder 
his meeting with the King or leaning on his 
arm as he went out from the Dark Mountains. 
All that passed with Edwin amid these defiles 
I cannot say it was six days that he spent in 
going through weary days and weary nights. 
Once or twice a heavenly light broke on the 
10* 
<pb>
lonely boy as he toiled along striving and needing 
often light and guidance and then when that 
light did shine it was wonderful what sights met 
his eye. On the wall of the rock were sculptured 
names without end of those who passed before 
him and here and there were relics they had left 
behind and all had been assailed by Azrael but 
marvellous to say with not one had he succeeded. 
Where the first beam of light fell through the 
dark mists was the name of Abraham who trod 
the narrow path a hundred and seventy-five years 
and he rested on a stone which still lay there 
and there was jacob's name it was recorded that 
he had a sore trial amid these defiles owing to 
some difficulty in keeping the narrow path of life 
it was so narrow to him and there was joseph's 
on which the sunbeam fell most brightly a 
hundred and ten years old and he passed 
through the mountains in safety and he looked 
and on the place where joseph's name was there 
had grown a vine and a well had been dug for 
the refreshment of pilgrims and Edwin drank of 
the well and ate of the vine for he loved to look 
at joseph's name for he said to himself he was 
divided from his own family as I am and yet 
Jesus loved him and carried him safely through. 
Under joseph's name was that of Sebastian and 
by him five arrows lay for Sebastian had inscribed 
<pb>
his name beneath joseph's since one word told 
both their stories. The archers have sorely 
grieved him and shot at him and hated him but 
his bow abode in strength and the arms of his 
hands were made strong by the hands of the 
mighty God of Jacob from thence is the Shepherd 
the stone of Israel. 
Now Edwin paused and rested long here for 
he took great delight in these names and beneath 
sebastian's name he wrote the name of Urban 
his brother for he fancied he saw some resemblance 
in the two. So he did the passage 
of these glorious ones cheered Edwin on his lone 
journey. 
Then as he advanced there were new names 
which went on and on in one unending and continuous 
line on which and over which the sunbeam 
wandered and paused as if it loved to linger 
there for they whose names were there were children 
of light. There was Stephen the first who 
died for Jesus sake and beneath his name the 
stones on which he fell marked with his blood 
but a quaint conceit of one who wrote his name 
had added to the inscription that that rock was 
Chkist. There was James and the headsman's 
axe which lay beside the rock. peter's name 
was written there as one who had sojourned 
through that valley and the cross stood on the 
<pb>
rock over his name head downward. There 
were andrew's footstep and above his name was 
the cross again. Oh that cross that glorious 
cross badge of our high profession symbol of our 
faith! 
On and on Edwin walked and gazed where the 
stream of sunlight led him. Here Polycarp had 
stood amid the blazing pyre and gazed out through 
the vista on the land of the free and the blackened 
pile lay crumbling to ashes still and the teeth 
of tigers mouldered white amid the dust where 
Ignatius passed in triumph to his Loed. There 
too below perpetua's name hung the tangled net 
in which the bull tossed her and there Felicitas 
her song of joy was inscribed on the rock below 
her name. Agnes name was there then the 
forty martyrs of Sebaste had left their names over 
a frozen lake whose waters were frozen still and 
the bands lay by with which cruel men had bound 
their bodies to the ice. There was cyprian's axe 
and alban's name shining in the heavenly light. 
There but time would fail to tell of all those 
who had passed that dark ravine and whom Edwin 
viewed as the vanguard who had trod the way 
before him. 
But now the air became more murky and cold 
beyond all description and wild dark birds of night 
flapped their wings and shrieked above the boy 
<pb>
and the roaring wind howled with piteous wail 
up the valley on every side. However cold and 
bleak the darkness was more dreadful still were 
the sounds. He became faint he remembered his 
mother's love and his sister's dear companionship 
and he fancied he heard their voices linger round 
him still and he wept. Oh when will this dark 
sojourn be over? For all the while the noise 
was heard amid the hills of azrael's last approach 
and terrible voices which broke from Helicos 
who was bent on seizing Edwin at the final exit. 
But though these were all around none came any 
nearer they were like sounds in a dream. 
And now when all seemed at the worst and 
hope began to fail on a sudden a stream of glory 
shone down from heaven and rested on a figure 
which hung with arms outstretched on a cross 
which stood on the roadside. The eyes of that 
figure were resting full on Edwin with unutterable 
love. The head wore a crown of thorns. What 
made it more striking still was the deep shadow 
which hung all around while on the Form shining 
from above the intense light fell. Edwin 
drew near at the sight and standing before the 
crucified One leaning on his own cross he gazed 
on Him in silent rapture. He whose arms were 
outstretched on the cross seemed to look full at 
him and at him alone that look sent rapture to 
<pb>
his soul. Then in the stillness the crucified One 
spoke and His voice low and beautiful sounded 
far and wide amid the valleys and in an instant 
all was silent azrael's chariot wheels and Heli 
cos cries were heard no more. 
What wouldst thou my own beloved one? 
How sweetly on edwin's sinking senses did that 
voice sound in the vision of his death night! 
My own beloved one! Words more precious 
than countless jewels. 
What would I? I seek Him Whom My soul 
loveth I have sought Him but I thought I found 
Him not. 
Then said the voice I am He and the echo 
of those words sounded on as if forever amid the 
stillness. 
Art Thou He? said Edwin. I have wandered 
through these dark valleys these many days 
and longed to find Thee. I opened to Thee 
but my Beloved had withdrawn Himself and was 
gone my soul failed I sought Him but He gave 
no answer 
In a small moment was the answer I have 
forsaken thee but with everlasting kindness will 
I have mercy on thee. It was but for a moment. 
The day breaks and the shadows flee away. 
Those words said Edwin are happy but 
<pb>
I dread the last passage! Oh Thou glorious 
One canst Thou be with me? 
When thou passest through the Valley of the 
Shadow of Death I am with thee My rod and 
My staff they comfort thee. 
Already I feel the damp arise and the faintness 
of the passage comes over me. 
I too fainted beneath the cross on which 
you see me now and bore that weight for thee. 
Would that I might stay here and gaze on 
Thee! and I can forget all in Thy amazing sorrow 
in Thy unimagined love. 
If thou lovest Me then go and bear without 
murmur the sorrows of that final woe which I bore 
for thee and thou wilt glorify Me. 
I will go where Thou hast gone where Thou 
lodgest I will lodge where Thou hast died I will 
die. 
And as he spoke he still stood gazing at the 
Figure which in the darkness stood out upon the 
cross while the beam of light still rested upon the 
head. 
But as he looked he saw it no more the darkness 
enfolded the Form and it was gone still he 
heard a voice through the darkness which said in 
clear accents Come unto Me all ye that are 
weary and heavy laden and I will give you rest. 
And Edwin went on alone. He drew his dress 
<pb>
around him and broke out into these words to 
give himself courage i will follow Thee wither 
soever Thou goest. He moved on amid the last 
defiles of the Dark Mountains. Who would ever 
have imagined who had trod the narrow road who 
had seen the heavenly city ever glowing far away 
that a scene so terrible darkness so deep sounds 
so mournful could have been heard again! 
But so it was and they say since Adam fell all 
have had to pass it and that all will till time 
shall be no more. 
And I saw him no more. 
CHAPTER viii 
THE FLEEING OF THE SHADOWS. 
Until the day bjeak and the shadows flee away. 
Jesu whenever Thy pardoning eye 
Is turned to look on me 
The morning star breaks out on high 
And all the shadows flee. 
There was a long pause a silence 1 saw no 
one. I only saw the long pathway and the vast 
tremendous barrier of the mountains. I thought 
<pb>
that one came to me and bid me follow him and 
I did. I thought I stood on one of the heights 
around the city. But I saw nothing save a light 
unutterable which I might not look into. He bid 
me look up and I beheld far off the bars of the 
Dark Mountains yet on their other side I would 
scarcely believe they were the same they appeared 
very distant. I could see through a ravine beyond 
two of them the long windings of the narrow 
road and as I looked he who was with me 
gave me a glass and I observed through it Cyril 
and Pietro advancing up the path together each 
with his staff in his hand and far behind them a 
small but blessed company whom I detected to be 
edwin's family. They had by this time joined 
the two boys. 
On taking my eye from the glass I suddenly 
looked on the Dark Mountains and I could see 
the figure of one very far away advancing slowly 
and solitarily through the chasm. 
It was Edwin he was passing through the last 
trial. Happy Edwin presently you will see the 
heavenly city presently the glory will be revealed 
presently all azrael's power will be forever at an 
end presently you will be free the day will 
break and the shadows flee away. 
Happy Edwin! but thou dost not see it yet 
11 
<pb>
thou dost not yet know how near thou art to the 
end of all thy labours. 
On he came alone and the white folds of his 
garments waved against the dark background he 
evidently did not notice the light which shone between 
him and me. I longed to see the effect of 
it when he should I anxiously watched each 
step. 
At this moment I heard a scream more dreadful 
than any I ever heard before. It seemed to 
rend the air and echoed on far away beyond the 
barriers of the mountains. 
I never heard so wild so despairing a cry. On 
a sudden a light glared up from the Dark Mountains 
and opened out a view far very far up a 
vista among the hills. A light seemed to burst 
from ten thousand torches lurid and ruddy and 
glowing. By degrees hideous forms rose up 
frecking the firelight. I saw the chariot of Azrael 
with its horses pawing and breathing fire. I saw 
a throne of huge gigantic size hewn out of the 
solid granite beneath this weight a figure of a 
man was stooping. Azrael was directing his 
satellites to press the mass upon the shoulders of 
a wretched being who bent in anguish beneath 
the terrible throne the sweat streamed from his 
forehead his arms were folded over his bosom 
the muscles of which seemed bursting with tension. 
<pb>
His eyes strained up toward Azrael with a look 
of infernal hatred his clenched fingers showed the 
intolerable anguish he suffered his stooping posture 
gave the idea of measureless pain. It was 
Helicos. By his side lay a shivered hourglass. 
the last grain was gone! 
The broken hourglass! Forever and forever 
shouted Azrael till the echo resounded far 
and wide amid the hills forever and ever! 
Helicos shuddered forever and ever! and 
the throne lay upon his shoulder and Azrael ascended 
it while pale shadowy thousands stood 
round. Azrael laughed as the heaving form of 
Helicos moved the throne Forever and forever! 
Let all learn who undertake to bring 
a soul to me and fail. See yon shattered hourglass 
remember the cavern where he accepted 
the gauge. Forever and forever and on a sudden 
Azrael clapped his hand and the mountains 
seemed to close in with a crash and the pale 
spirits were again embosomed in the darkness 
which could be felt. 
Forever and forever and azrael's chariot 
swept away against the lurid sky. 
Forever and forever 1 uttered a voice the 
music of whose sentences sounded to my soul like 
<pb>
a thousand waters in a thirsty desert. Forever 
and forever safe forever! 
I looked to the quarter from whence the voice 
came. Oh yes Forever and forever! I saw 
Edwin coming. His dress shone like light. He 
was just stepping from the last jutting crag another 
moment he would stand on the measureless 
plain with Heaven close by another moment. 
Behind him came the angel but I do not think 
Edwin saw him. It was that angel who said 
Forever and forever! and the music of his 
words sounded on and on through the endless 
chasm of hills. In his hand too was an hourglass 
and the last grain dropped through. 
Blessed Spirit then thou hast done thy work 
thy glorious work. How bright will be thy 
everlasting reward! 
But now I looked again and Edwin had passed 
the last point he stood on the plain before him 
was Heaven. 
The city of his long desire the home for which 
he had yearned so long. There it rose in its 
matchless beauty. Its thousand towers its streets 
of gold its gates of pearl its foundations of precious 
stones. 
Edwin stood dazzled by the glorious sight. 
Oh Jesus! eye hath not seen neither hath ear 
heard nor hath it entered the heart of man to 
<pb>
imagine what Thou hast prepared for them that 
love Thee. 
The plain which lay before Edwin and the city 
swept away in infinite distance on either side. 
Enamelled flowers rose beneath the cloudless unshadowed 
sky. There was no cold no darkness 
no gloom a vail of mist seemed to have risen 
up like morning dew and shut out the view of 
the Dark Mountains. Edwin and the angel alone 
broke the expanse. 
Lo the winter is past the frost is over and 
gone the flowers appear on the earth the time 
of the singing of birds has come and the voice 
of the turtle is heard in our land the fig tree 
putteth forth green figs and the vines with the 
tender grapes give a good smell. My beloved is 
mine and I am his for the day has broken and 
the shadows flee away. 
But while I stood looking on Edwin delighted 
with his astonished gaze I had not observed what 
was taking place. On a sudden a light beyond 
that of the sun sweetly soft as if from myriads 
of jewels was shed over the scene. I turned 
and lo! from the gates of the city there came 
in wonderful order and majesty yet passing 
swiftly an endless train of angels each with a 
harp in his hand and the music which burst 
from the strings was as when a sea with all its 
11* 
<pb>
ripples reflects sunshine from each so every harp 
seemed to give forth its separate ripple of harmony. 
But all were plainly moving with a purpose. 
They were going to bring Edwin home. 
The procession passed me. At length they reached 
him I hid my face for a moment from the lustre 
and radiance of the scene. 
I looked again Edwin was in the midst of 
them ascending to his eternal home. Oh the 
majesty of that long procession! And now 
another sight burst on my view. Another form 
had left the city and advanced toward Edwin 
and when Edwin looked on him he knew him 
and he fell on his brother's neck and kissed him. 
The only words he said as he looked at him 
were It is not a dream my brother! and his 
face again sunk on his breast. 
But now a uew phase of the scene opened in 
splendour upon me. On a sudden instantaneously 
all those angelic beings bowed their faces to the 
earth. In a moment every harp was mute and 
far as I could see over the plain the countless 
millions bowed before one Object. The very 
air was penetrated with a lustre which was reflected 
from their wings. I cast my eyes on Edwin. 
He had left his brother's side and stood 
alone. He was gazing in mute wonder on some 
object. Another instant and he too fell upon his 
<pb>
face though as he did it I shall never forget the 
unearthly beauty of his expression the perfect 
peace of his eye. 
A silence inconceivably deep sunk upon the 
vast plain as if all were hushed over infinity that 
one Voice should alone be heard and earth and 
air and sky be still of sound that all might hear 
the Voice. I noticed and though I did not turn 
to see the Form of Him who spoke for a strange 
awe held me back I felt that it was to Edwin 
that Voice was addressed. It spoke and the 
echo rung on forever. 
Thou hast set thy love upon Me 
Therefore have I delivered Thee. 
Happy Edwin and has He said those words to 
you? And are you then delivered? If I had 
not known whose Voice uttered those words the 
next moment would have told me for no sooner 
had they been spoken and that happy boy stood 
before the Form unseen as yet by me in the 
beauty of his undying nature with his eyes fixed 
on Him who now stood before him than from 
every part of that deep stillness one harmonious 
sound broke out. Every hand held a harp and 
through the millions of angelic forms every one 
struck the strings yet so simultaneously did the 
harp and voice combine that though from un 
<pb>
numbered multitudes it seemed to come but from 
one and the word of the hymn was but one and 
that one was 
JESUS. 
I looked for Edwin I saw him on his face before 
Him from Whom I supposed the light came. 
Though I saw no one he did. It seemed as if 
some one called him for he rose. But the lustre 
of his countenance was too radiant for me to 
look at. 
He was ever beautiful but now his beauty 
was of a more unearthly and heavenly character 
than I had ever seen or conceived before. I saw 
him go. I saw the thousand times ten thousand 
go with him in long and wonderful procession. 
I saw his brother by his side. I saw the great 
light in which as in an illuminated atmosphere 
He was Who as I heard from all around was 
chief among ten thousand and altogether lovely. 
But I saw Him not. I saw them go. The 
golden gates flew open at their coming and forth 
from them soared strains which even transcended 
all I heard outside. And Edwin was lost to my 
eye in the glory. The last I saw of him I can 
well remember he was close by the side of Him 
whom his soul loved. I saw Edwin give up his 
ross to Jesus. It had done its work. They 
<pb>
two went in together and as they went in I 
heard a voice say the voice of the Holy One 
I have accepted thee! and they were gone 
gone into the heavenly city. 
Oh happy Edwin! What would I not give to 
be with thee? Safe no possibility of ever falling 
from Him again. 
To those that seek Him oh how kind! 
But what is He to those who find? 
Happy Edwin! All your temptations over 
all sorrows ended and tears are wiped from your 
eye. You have attained the object of your long 
journey you have gained the aim of life. 
For you dear boy the winter is past the rain 
is over and gone the flowers appear on the 
earth the time of the singing of birds is come. 
The voice of the turtle is heard in the land the 
fig tree has put forth its green figs. Thou hast 
arisen Edwin and gone the day has broken and 
the shadows fled away. 
Such were my thoughts as I stood looking on 
the now closed doors and the walls of the heavenly 
city. I heard one approaching me. I started 
and I found I was alone the Dark Mountains 
rose behind me in terrible awe. The vast plain 
was empty the air was still which just before 
had been laden with those matchless sounds. 
<pb>
So Edwin was gone. I looked round and I 
found one beautiful one and only one lingering 
on the plain he stood near me. I turned to 
him and said Sir I would ask you a question. 
He said Say on. 
It appears to me that rather by the love of 
the King Edwin has entered his rest than by any 
works which he has done. 
He said You have judged truly. 
But that love is wonderful. 
It is indeed. 
I said sir can you tell me why He so loves 
us? 
The angel answered It is beyond my power 
to tell. His Love is wonderful and is past 
man's imagination. 
Music broke upon my ear and the burden of a 
hymn came floating by 
Those who have Thee in their heart 
Know Love of Jesus what Thon art. 
And I saw and heard no more. 
Oh Blessed Jesus love me even as Thou 
lovedst him and take me forever to Thyself as 
Thou hast taken him for indeed Thou art to me 
more than life besides. The chief among ten 
thousand and altogether lovely. 
<pb>
i 
CHAPTER ix 
WITHOUT GRACE LOST. 
Let Mm that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall. 
May mists which gather round my mind 
And vail my sight of Thee 
The aching doubt the thought unkind 
Like midnight shadows flee. 
But Cyril and Pietro where are they? And 
edwin's happy family where are they? Will 
they all follow him? Will none be wanting 
there? 
Lonely and rather sad I walked again to a 
hill which overhung the Dark Mountains from 
which I could see the whole length of the long 
narrow road. Far down it my eyes were arrested 
by two groups. Cyril and Pietro clearly 
formed one of them in advance while beyond 
them came another composed of edwin's family 
all heavenward bound. 
I now perceived that the whole force and energy 
of Azrael were turned against those who 
were advancing and especially against Cyril and 
his companion Pietro. I had remembered from 
</div>
<pb>
<div id="the dark mountains;without grace, lost" code="5" wordcount="6961">
time to time that Cyril had become more and 
more thoughtful and yet withal cheerful on his 
journey. Difficulty and danger had given him 
great experience and ever and anon I saw that 
pilgrims resorted to him for guidance and counsel. 

But he was not to go home so easily there 
were sore conflicts yet to pass still dark shadows 
still depths in the mountains which even 
cyril's prepared spirit might quail at. azrael's 
host were preparing for some terrible effort to 
stop their triumphant entry into the City of Rest. 
But I saw that no longer as before in edwin's 
case was one spirit sent to do the work but a 
number of many and diverse evil ones each one 
armed with his own peculiar weapons. Some 
were framed for hurling from afar some for more 
close and immediate conflict. There were spears 
and darts thin poisoned and subtle there were 
swords and maces axes and hammers. I saw 
too both slings and staves and every kind of 
weapon which azrael's vast armoury could provide 
turned against the two boys. 
This company set forth full of life and expectation 
and I doubted not had exceeding high 
rewards offered them in case of success. I saw 
too that they wore every kind of grotesque and 
curious dress so that they could change their 
<pb>
form and assume new appearances the more to 
deceive under the garb of angels of light. 
They set forth along the widenings of that deep 
valley which I had so often noticed lying between 
the palace of Azrael and the way of eternal life. 
I felt anxious at seeing the equipment of this 
grim and ghastly band. 
But while I was mourning over it I heard a 
voice which echoed far and wide along the road 
No weapon formed against thee shall prosper 
and the words made me happy. For I knew that 
faithful was He who promised who also would 
do it. I noticed too that in the orders given 
Pietro was especially mentioned and strict charge 
was given to secure him too. Poor Pietro! my 
heart bled for him and I remembered where it 
says the righteous keepeth himself and that 
wicked one toncheth him not and I knew that 
the time had been when he had not kept himself 
and so lay open on all sides to those terrible enemies. 
Happy Edwin! to be beyond all reach of 
temptation or change. 
Now Cyril for a season after Edwin was gone 
was rather more off his guard than usual. A. 
company of pilgrims had come up to him and 
were inquiring of him certain things about the 
journey and the way and he by tracing maps 
and discoursing on his own knowledge of the 
12 
<pb>
road to the great delight it is true of those 
who heard him was growing careless and taking 
his eyes off the Heavenly City and indeed 
they succeeded in throwing him off his guard. 
I well knew the danger of this for I had often 
heard of it. This was quickly perceived by the 
company of tempters for one suddenly darted 
forward from the rest. I was curious to see him. 
He was fair and pleasant to look upon and by no 
means repulsive nor did I discern any weapon 
about his person. I did not see what I did 
afterward a poisoned dagger concealed under 
his dress of a most deadly nature. 
Nay I know the way well said Cyril to a 
small company of pilgrims who had just come up 
to him and were anxious about their route. 
There was a slight tinge of overmuch independence 
in the boy which looked as if he might be 
forgetting his own dependence on grace and as 
he spoke I could not but see that on his tablet 
more than once were lines written under his name 
ascribing glory to himself and the name of Jesus 
seemed disregarded. 
But sir said an old man who was the leader 
of the party this way along which you have 
marked your path appears not to have the signs 
and marks pointed out in my map of the route 
and the mists are so thick and heavy that I can 
<pb>
not see the way without some little guidance. I 
should indeed young sir dread losing it again 
as I have often done so long since and most bitterly 
have had to rue it. 
Now Cyril seemed more confident than ever 
and withal appeared rather hurt and annoyed at 
any doubt being cast upon his guidance. 
I need no map said he to show me. I 
know the way well and every turn in it. Trust 
me sir I have never left it. 
There was an arrogance in his manner which 
certainly startled me and made me fear the consequence. 

Well then said the old pilgrim we will 
needs take your advice for we are most anxious 
about the road lest we should fall again and we 
can hardly do better than trust the counsel of 
one who evidently knows the lords way so 
well as you. 
His companions two youths and a little girl 
who walked between them assented and with 
deep humility and gratitude the company proceeded. 

I certainly did feel vexed at cyril's arrogant 
manner and regretted much that he should so 
far have forgotten himself. But Pietro stepped 
forward. I never saw Pietro to such advantage. 
He was usually so retiring and sad so little will 
<pb>
ing to take the lead in anything but he assumed 
a firmness now which was astonishing yet 
it was mingled with humility and a consciousness 
of having fallen. 
Forgive me for speaking Cyril when you are 
so far far more able to guide all of us than I am 
and kind sir said he advancing to the old man 
forgive me for speaking when I have erred so 
much further from the heavenly road than you 
have indeed I do not desire to guide you but I 
think you are taking the wrong road. There are 
many by paths just hereabouts and I noticed 
some time since when I was studying the map 
that there were fogs and mists which hung very 
thick still. I think this is the road said he 
pointing to another than the one Cyril had mentioned 
and as he spoke a blaze of light shone 
from his sapphire on the path and illumined 
pietro's face. so 
I thought said the stranger my judgement 
agrees with yon there and I think I will 
take it and he and his family drew back from 
the path along which at cyril's suggestion they 
had begun to pursue their journey 
You are not offended Cyril are you said 
Pietro going up to him in kind and winning 
tones. I am sure I never meant to wound or 
supersede you I who am most unworthy. 
<pb>
Oh nonsense said Cyril nonsense the 
only thing is they will miss their way finally now 
of that I am sure. But never mind I will convince 
you that I am right by going it myself. 
So saying he threw his dress around him and 
began to enter the depths of the fog into the disputed 
path. 
I will soon convince you I am right said 
Cyril somewhere hereabouts if I remember 
truly and he continued groping in the path to 
find the sign in question. It was not there. 
Nay Cyril nay you were wrong indeed you 
were do not go into danger like that you know 
not what may be on that path oh do not go into 
those mists there are falls and quagmires and 
dangers of all sorts which may prove your ruin! 
But it was vain speaking for Cyril had gone on 
bent on showing Pietro and the rest in the wrong 
and perhaps more still wishing to show himself in 
the right. 
I wondered what would follow for I felt sure 
trouble would befall that high and arrogant spirit. 
I was certain he would not go on without some 
signal punishment for I remembered how the 
Lord ever punishes His own and every branch 
which beareth fruit He purgeth it that it may 
bring forth more fruit. 
And that Cyril loved him wonderfully I did not 
12* 
<pb>
doubt and that the Lord loved him for indeed 
there had been signs enough so I felt Cyril 
would have a fall. 
He had not gone far on the road when he 
heard a voice through the fog. A group of persons 
were approaching one figure emerged from 
the mist. He at once accosted Cyril. 
I am glad young sir to find yon on this path 
your fame has gone before you. Men tell us on 
all sides that you are a guide to the doubting and 
a stay to the weak. This is a glorious character. 
Cyril had left the path and all this was sweet 
to him. Hitherto one Voice alone had delighted 
him when it spoke of the work he had done. 
It was that Voice he heard in the deep noiseless 
stillness of the visions of the night. With 
that he had been satisfied and often had that 
Voice said to him I love to praise thee but 
remember my praise rests not on him who is 
praised by others. 
Cyril was pleased. I am glad said he that 
I have been of use. It has been my aim to glorify 
my Lord. 
You have shown it said the other again. 
On the waxen tablet an unseen hand wrote another 
sentence of praise under cyril's name and 
erased one which had ascribed glory to Jesus 
<pb>
and your praise is in all the churches continued 
the stranger. 
Cyril was delighted he drank in the flattery 
he ceased to listen to the Voice he had been accustomed 
to love alone. 
There is a poor wretch who is lying by the 
roadside he seems in wild and inconsolable despair 
I think you might heal and comfort and 
direct him you are skilled in such things do 
come. 
Cyril at once obeyed this time it was to hear 
more flattery and praise and not for his lord's 
sake. At that moment he remembered Pietro 
and the company he had left he recollected he 
might be of far more importance to them. But 
the old man could give him small praise and 
if he did from so unknown and poor a pilgrim it 
would scarcely be of value and Pietro he was accustomed 
to he made his choice and rejecting 
them accepted the offer. 
This is delightful thought Cyril. I do not 
know why I never enjoyed this luxury before the 
good works I have done the use that I have been 
to others the power with which I have overcome 
myself when others have either lost the crown 
they had worn or never worn one at all. Yes 
this is a delightful contemplation and as he 
thought and spoke these thoughts to himself he 
<pb>
lost sight of the glow by the city and the Figure 
he had hitherto delighted to imagine. This did 
make him pause for an instant his tempter saw 
him and as cyril's eye fell upon him he assumed 
an attitude of such humility his eye was fixed 
with a look of such devotion and intense feeling 
on some unseen object that Cyril thought he had 
never seen so humble and lowly a figure. 
Do you doubt me said the evil one you 
seemed to hesitate. 
Not in the least said Cyril only I no 
longer see the glow nor the faint outline of the 
Form I have followed. 
They are not always visible and those who 
grow strong in heavenly things need them less. 
You are no longer a babe and want not so much 
as formerly such clear visions. 
True true said Cyril thoughtfully. I have 
long been a slave I will be so no more I will 
be free I who have continued on the road when 
so many have fallen away I who have entered 
upon it so long ago aye from the beginning yes 
I may indeed not fear losing myself and may 
draw a little upon my knowledge and experience. 
All this time the stranger was leading Cyril on 
into places further and further from the narrow 
road. The pathway itself was singularly easy and 
the atmosphere light and clear though it was far 
<pb>
away indeed from the heavenly city whose glow 
was never seen along those deceitful ways. 
But above all the Form which is chief among 
ten thousand was not visible that too was gone 
like a dream whose figures vanish and we wake 
and long to find them there. But in the place of 
the figure which Cyril used to love was a strange 
power in the air to reflect himself so that wherever 
Cyril looked he saw himself reflected and he 
liked to gaze on this repeated image and at last 
became so full of it that he quite forgot Jesus. 
How strange it is said he to his companion 
wherever I turn I see myself it is exceeding 
pleasant. But I cannot help thinking there were 
injunctions laid on us at the beginning of our 
journey that we were not to gaze upon ourselves 
in any way but only on Him whose image we are 
to reflect. 
True true said the other but then that 
was to be for awhile but at length in reflecting 
Him we reflect ourselves. This is your case so 
when you see yourself you as it were see Him 
and when you see Him you see yourself. 
This plausible reasoning went down well with 
Cyril for he thought he saw truth in it. 
Now presently I saw little companies of people 
apparently coming up the path the reverse one to 
that which Cyril was pursuing and as they came 
<pb>
along they were continually inquiring the way to 
the narrow road. But Cyril stopped them and 
offered to discourse to them of the beauty of the 
heavenly city of the terrible dangers of the Dark 
Mountains of the glorious company who had 
gradually entered the land of promise of edwin's 
blessed entrance of the music which could be 
heard ever and anon bursting from the gate as 
pilgrims entered there one after another so that 
they became absorbed and taken up with Cyril 
and forgot all else. Nor did he urge them to go 
on but appeared to like that they should linger 
around him. 
Now inasmuch as some of them were very late 
already in starting to find the heavenly way and 
as there was to some the greatest possible difficulty 
in finding it after the time had elapsed they 
were sadly hindered by the delay and this Cyril 
ought to have known. But he did not care to 
remember it and as I afterward heard some 
were irrecoverably injured by this loitering and 
some were overtaken by azrael's never sleeping and 
ever active crew and some were entangled in bogs 
and morasses and had it not been for the Shepherd's 
voice sounding from a distance they never 
had found their way to the narrow road but as I 
heard the kind One stood long waiting where 
that path of self seeking met the path that He 
<pb>
might set His seal upon them and give them 
their cross. 
But He waited long and in vain for strange 
to say Cyril stopped their reaching Him. Had 
Cyril known that he was thus disobeying his 
Lord or preventing others in coming to Him he 
would have felt it most keenly but he forgot all 
about it. 
One thing I heard was that he was exceedingly 
satisfied at finding that the names of Peter 
and Hezekiah and even Joseph were inscribed 
here and there along the path so that as he 
said travelling in such company he could not go 
far wrong. 
Oh Cyril Cyril did you but know the sorrow 
you would feel for this afterward how eagerly 
would you fly from this accursed road! Ever 
and anon the pilgrims looked round toward the 
narrow way and one thought he heard sweet and 
far off accents of the shepherd's voice such as He 
ever uses and some one imagined that he could 
just discern the glow which hung over the heavenly 
city. But each time cyril's shadow fell on 
the Figure and the glow and. prevented their 
being seen any more by those who had caught 
them. 
Oh see see said one how lovely that pale 
light is which gleams so very far away! Oh how 
<pb>
much fairer than anything we have yet seen on 
this garish by laud. Surely that must come from 
the heavenly home. But the next moment 
cyril's shadow hid the light from view. 
And once a poor fellow in rapture thought he 
heard the voice of the kind One as He said and 
cried aloud Come unto Me all ye that are 
weary and heavy laden and I will give you 
rest. 
But cyril's voice which was growing louder 
each minute drowned it altogether. True he 
was speaking and giving descriptions of the 
King aud of His love but if he drowned His 
voice and eclipsed His matchless Form what 
good did he do? And to make himself alone 
the object of attraction was indeed contrary to 
all the laws of heaven. As to the waxen tablet 
cyril's name alone crowded it all over. 
How long this would have gone on I cannot 
tell for as each arrived at the spot they stood 
engrossed in Cyril. But at last there came up a 
youth who was going toward the city and his 
eye was fixed straight before him as if he were 
quite intent upon the point to which he went. 
A most wonderful light shone and played upon 
his countenance and he bore in his hand a mirror 
which clearly reflected the figure of the mer 
<pb>
ciful One Who was standing with open arms to 
receive him. 
Now Cyril could not help seeing this and when 
his eye for a moment did rest upon the countenance 
and the form expressed in the glass he 
stood like one astonished. Like lightning there 
burst on him all he had left his ingratitude and 
his imminent danger. He turned round to go 
back but it was most difficult. All those who 
had been offering him their homage had broken 
up the way and in anguish the boy saw the outline 
of the hills he had so loved like pale shades 
in a dream very far away and beyond his reach. 
He wept bitterly. Oh how the memory of his 
former love broke like an overwhelming torrent 
on his soul! What would he then have given 
if he had never left the road! His tempter was 
near and was conjuring up every conceivable 
reason for staying him. His influence his high 
powers his eminent qualifications the discredit 
he would bring on himself if he left those who 
had just begun to form and gather round him 
that he would be the founder of a school and 
the centre of many admirers. But what was all 
that to him? He had but one desire to be reunited 
with Him he had loved. Before that object 
all other aims faded as stars before the morning. 

13 
<pb>
High powers talents influence qualifications 
what were they to heaven to Him with Whom 
eternity was to be spent? What was their exercise 
when he was to be forever banished from 
the home for which he had lived and travelled so 
far? 
Oh no! But lead me to Him it is all I 
need and in doing that break down forever all 
my influence my position my talent. 
And in an agony of grief at which all those 
looked surprised who watched him Cyril strove 
to hasten toward Him after Whom his soul 
longed. 
Long and weary I am told through many 
anxious days and waking nights were his efforts 
to reach the lost way and Jesus Whom he had 
loved. Often and often did the figures of those 
for whom he had forsaken it fleet past it and 
beckon him back. But he pressed his hands over 
his eyes saying 
Oh no! restore me to Him Whom I have 
lost for you. Go go and cast your praise and 
honour at his feet. He is worthy He alone. Oh 
that I were but hid in Him hid forever in the 
palm of His hand and under the shadow of his 
wing! 
I heard it was in one of these moments of extreme 
desire and longing and when he went on 
<pb>
still saying words much to this effect Give me 
Him for Whom my soul longeth that on a sudden 
he drew his hand from his eyes and He stood 
before him the chief among ten thousand and 
altogether lovely. 
There was no anger on His brow no sorrow 
in His eye. He extended His arms to Cyril with 
a smile full of forgiveness and the next moment 
Cyril lay upon His bosom and his feet were upon 
the heavenly road. 
You must now spend many days Cyril 
said He in bringing back to the path those 
whom you have caused to err 
Cyril seized again and again that Hand and 
could scarcely speak for weeping. Tell me 
only tell me what to do and I will do it with my 
life. 
And he did. He spent many more hours in 
trying to bring those wanderers home than he 
had spent in luring them away. And he brought 
them all. His one unceasing effort was to make 
them look at Jesus not at himself. When his 
work was done I saw the waxen tablet every 
letter of cyril's name was erased and the name 
of Jesus alone stood out in beauty there. 
But the troop of tempters were active. They 
had not done their work and though one had 
been baffled it was not for the rest to be so too. 
<pb>
Cyril had scarcely walked any way with his Lord 
when he was again assailed. Pietro had gone on 
before poor boy. He had lost no time and 
though he went weeping sometimes still he proceeded 
on his homeward road ever and anon taking 
his jewel from his bosom and inspired to 
tenfold energy by seeing how bright it shone. 
Cyril felt pietro's going without him and though 
he knew the time was short ere he would overtake 
him he wept over it. 
Why weepest thou said a young man who 
came up into the road just at the point where 
Cyril was passing by. Is it because your companions 
have gone on and you are alone? This 
is a dark road for such as you so long a toil and 
so protracted a reward. Oh that you would 
come on to one of those pathways where the 
many are who go on their way rejoicing. 
Cyril was just then peculiarly open to the suggestion. 
He felt the loneliness and the monotony 
of his sojourn now that the excitement of 
his penitence was somewhat past and he often 
burned and longed for that change and excitement 
which he felt other paths might give him. 
How long are you to go on toiling on this 
old narrow road? Others advance in the great 
struggle of life and come off crowned with success 
and praise and glory illustrious birth 
<pb>
splendid talents the flash of wit the wealth of 
imagination are the possessions of thousands of 
youths who along other and nobler paths pursue 
their splendid way. You drudge on with no 
competition to bring out your power no opportunity 
to give point to your ambition and what 
have you got? You seem no nearer the end. 
The Master you serve does not draw you any 
nearer Himself gives you no special manifestation 
of His favour and presence draws others into 
His palace and leaves you so that young Edwin 
has entered in and here are you. Nay more 
this Pietro with whom you sojourn is but a dull 
and sad companion and he seems just now before 
you in the race 
Cyril stood listening an expression of sullenness 
loomed on his brow and his finger lay on 
his lip. He looked around a mist deep and 
chilling and dull hung its grey drapery between 
him and the heavenly city. pietro's figure walked 
on before him irradiated with the light of his 
sapphire Edwin was gone long since past the 
Dark Mountains. Behind him it is true he saw 
groups of travellers coming along but they seemed 
but little likely to make his way merrier he listened 
to the tempter. 
Where can I find a better path? Can you 
13* 
<pb>
lead me to one? Will the King still love me and 
heaven still be my home? 
Yes yes surely the King loves to be glorified 
and amid the noble scenes and companions 
of those wider roads you can find an opportunity 
of showing your love to Him and exercising the 
powers He has given you which you never can 
here. 
Yes but did not the King go along the narrow 
road alone? are not His footsteps here and 
only here? did not all His own love it and keep 
in it and can I be safe in leaving that path however 
sad and solitary? Oh no I wish I loved 
it more. But indeed I dare not leave it at such 
a risk. 
While he hesitated the happy voice of a boy 
behind him burst upon his ear. His countenance 
beamed with the energy and glowing happiness 
of one to whom life is full of power. His clear 
deep eye beamed from a brow whose lines showed 
intelligent thought and feeling. He had in his 
hand a pilgrim's staff his feet were sandaled and 
his loins girt yet he wore the appearance of one 
who had travelled far and hard still no weariness 
seemed irksome to him no pain a drawback. 
Onward oh onward that was the speaking 
power of his eye that was the word written on 
his forehead. 
<pb>
He was ascending a slight eminence in the 
way and as he stood an instant he shaded his eye 
with his hand and glanced onward as if he were 
looking out for some one whom for a moment he 
had lost. His eager gaze overlooked cyril's 
hesitating figure who stood like one doubtful 
of which way to take by the roadside with his 
head hung down and his ear open to the voice 
of the tempter. 
He started on the appearance of the new traveller. 

He fixed his eye on him a3 he was passing. 
Cyril heard him say these words to himself the 
dove in the cleft of the rock and in the 
secret place of the stairs will I find him. As he 
looked a light as of a sunbeam burst along the 
heavenly way and broke the shadows which had 
gathered along the path. No shade could resist 
the glance of one earnest seeking eye. All the 
shadows fled away. 
Sir have you seen Him? said the boy 
eagerly addressing Cyril without looking at 
him. 
don't answer him he's mad said the 
tempter. 
Seen whom? said Cyril not heeding the 
tempter. 
<pb>
Whom? said the other why the only 
One. 
You mean the King said Cyril colouring 
and with a hesitating and stammering voice. 
No say no said the tempter you have not 
seen the King of late you have seen nothing but 
shadows and mists speak boy speak and lead 
another with you to the glorious path of light 
and energy and honour. 
The King seen the King said a voice of 
one who was suddenly brought to view by the 
rolling away of the mist and who was sitting or 
rather rolling by the roadside his face turned from 
the heavenly city and his garment stained with 
filth. Oh no I should think not they say He 
is here and he's there and we may sometimes 
hear His footfalls though we cannot see His 
Form and all such mawkish trash and we are 
told to go on walking though we cannot see or 
hear for we know the way. Foolery and nonsense! 
I am weary of it all weary I am going 
back this unconscious unrealizing life I cannot 
stand and that is enough. It is too much of a 
good thing. I have gone a good way now and 
i'll go no further. It were poor reward never to 
see Him and never to hear Him and yet to be 
bid to follow. Bid to follow indeed! And 
the poor wretch kept on rolling in the dust as if 
<pb>
his aim was to erase the very marks of his past 
life. 
Scarcely had he spoken when a number of 
voices broke out in the same strain from a number 
who were lying concealed behind. The mist 
all at once had curled up from the road before 
that one burning seeking eye. They too needed 
more clear and open sight and vision of Him they 
followed but it did not come amid this dismal 
chorus. It was curious to watch the different 
figures Cyril pausing and looking at them all 
heaving with emotion his eye filled with rising 
tears his face flushed with colour his hand firmly 
grasping his staff. The stranger stood staring 
first at one and then at the other in unconcealed 
astonishment a smile of surprise or contempt 
played around his lips as he again said to Cyril 
Yes have you seen Him? 
The King? Oh yes said Cyril. 
The King! ay Jesus sir have you seen 
Jesus? 
The burst of passionate love with which he 
uttered these words was so intense as to startle 
all. The echo of his voice rolled on like thunder 
to the gates of heaven and made angels rejoice. 
Jesus who else is there whom we would find 
or follow on this road and I have followed Him 
for years and have never left Him. Ever and 
<pb>
anon He reveals Himself to me and bow dear 
those glimpses are! I have given up all for Him 
and would give up far far more if only I may 
never cease pursuing Him till I hold Him firmly 
in heaven and then I shall never never never 
lose Him again. He is precious to my soul and 
because I have by a vile infirmity fallen asleep a 
few brief moments on the road I have lost so 
many steps and that clear and open vision of the 
future. I long to gain it again for indeed it has 
been the very motive spring of all my actions 
and the sweet vision made me bear and endure 
anything. 
As he spoke he was looking at Cyril and 
cyril's eye was fixed in astonishment and admiration 
on the eloquent face of the boy but just 
as he finished a voice spoke along the road saying 
I love them that love Me and they that 
seek Me early shall find Me. 
The boy looked round and as Cyril saw his 
countenance he sprang from his place in astonishment 
at the sudden change. His eye was 
fixed his lips half open quivered with emotion 
his face was radiant with a smile of ecstasy as he 
looked after Him who spoke. 
Through the mist far away appeared the 
Form of One before whom all shadows had fled 
away. The figure came out more and more 
<pb>
clearly in the light which was shed from the land 
of rest and peace. The boy's face lit up with joy 
unspeakable and he stretched out his arms and 
ran toward Him. Words cannot tell what that 
union was. They said that some fall of his had 
separated him from Him whom his soul loved. I 
do not know but I never saw such joy as that 
reunion created. 
My beloved is mine and I am his till the 
day breaketh and the shadows flee away. 
It was enough for Cyril. He started he sprung 
from the side of the tempter the latter caught 
hold of his flying garment but it rent in his hand. 
His dress bore afterward the marks of that grasp 
but Cyril was free. The shadows of indifference 
melted away before the clear and living faith of 
another. 
I looked once afterward I heard that Azrael 
had special power given him over the body of 
that noble boy. He used it all to try and tear 
him from his soul's object. His emissaries seized 
him and stripping him of his dress bound him 
to a tree by the wayside and offered him his life 
if he would for half an hour leave willfully the 
heavenly way. He laughed them to scorn. They 
strove to hinder his sight of the King but it was 
all in vain. Each obstacle they raised became 
as a glass through which the light streamed more 
<pb>
and more clearly. Nothing could put out that 
vision and nothing could divert his eye. There 
is nothing so strong that it can quench love. 
They shot him to death with poisoned arrows 
but as each rent in his bleeding flesh gaped wide 
open like so many mouths crying to the Blessed 
One his face shone with a smile more peaceful 
still and the lights of his home played on his 
beautiful brow. He shed his last life drops for 
Jesus and the next instant I saw the everlasting 
doors open and heard those joyous notes of the 
numberless choir who met him within the 
threshold and fell upon his neck and kissed him 
and I saw him no more. 
Cyril was passing as they were shooting their 
arrows and he walked on with thrice repeated 
energy. There was no more such indififerentism 
about him. I learned that youth's name afterward 
it was Sebastian one of that company of 
whom the world was not worthy. 
But the army of tempters had not exhausted 
their powers or resources. 
Another evil one passed Cyril. It was just 
after he had parted with Sebastian. 
It was a pale twilight form which pursued him 
with cold chilly hands and dull dead eyes. lie 
walked swiftly and came up by cyril's side. 
You walk fast young man! 
<pb>
Yes said Cyril it is for the pursuit of my 
high calling and he went on without looking 
round. 
Did you see young Sebastian killed in the 
road? 
Yes and that it is that spurs me on. 
But think of the pain and weariness of such 
a life there is no need for you to go through all 
that you have a long established character you 
know you will enter that heavenly kingdom 
without this amazing energy you have never left 
your Lord. Sebastian sinned in boyhood and 
so needed all that severe alacrity you have ever 
loved Him. It is labour and effort thrown 
away. 
Cyril slackened There is truth in that but 
I love to suffer for His dear sake. 
Yes but where is the use of a suffering of 
which you are conscious and which He does not 
impose? It will all end in vanity and self right 
eousness. 
Well but what was sebastian's then? 
Oh his was different. His was the act of 
lawful restitution for past sin. He could do no 
otherwise. 
True very true but what would you have 
me relax? 
Why rise so early in the morning? why be so 
14 
<pb>
exact through the day? why be always putting 
so severe a restraint on your animal spirits your 
youthful energy your love of enjoyment? You 
will be at the heavenly home quite as soon without 
it? 
Well I do suffer from all that early rising 
and extreme activity I often think. If you could 
persuade me that I shall be safe in giving it up 
I think I could. 
Try it for one day say tomorrow and see 
whether you lose much by it. 
I will. 
Your past character is enough all think and 
speak well of you you are prominent along the 
road which the pilgrims travel where is the use 
of having laid in the stock of so good a name 
if you may not draw upon it? Come come enjoy 
life and take it more easily. 
Cyril yielded at first to the persuasion no word 
of added glory was inscribed on the waxen tablet 
under the Name of Jesus that day under cyril's 
name more than one. He had often been inclined 
to rebel at the continued activity of his life. That 
girdle ever binding his loins that staff ever at 
hand that close pilgrim's dress the simple water 
and bread of the king's highway. Though he 
loved them oh how much still under temptation 
they seemed irksome to him. The early flush 
<pb>
of dawn at which he was expected to be up and 
moving the short night ever hitherto spent with 
his face toward the heavenly city dear as they 
still were to him now for an instant they appeared 
bondage and slavery. Yet he knew that they 
were not and that in his real self he did not 
count them so. 
The tempter smiled as he saw his success and 
imagined that he could win the mighty prize 
which Azrael had offered to the successful lurer. 
That night Cyril lay down without his loins 
girt with his face away from the heavenly city 
and his staff cast aside out of his reach. It was 
far past midnight and he slept heavily and over 
him bending like a cloud leaned the form of his 
tempter. Cyril was startled from his sleep by the 
distant howl of a wild beast or indeed as it seemed 
of many for they infested the sides of this road and 
often attacked unwary travellers. There was the 
blending of many sounds the howl of the ravening 
wolf and the hissing of the snake at the same 
time dark and heavy clouds drew over the sky and 
a tempest began to thicken making a contest with 
wild beasts more perilous still. 
Cyril started it seemed to him at first as if it 
had been a dreadful dream. But he soon discovered 
it was a reality. 
He started up aroused from his lethargy but 
<pb>
as he did so two figures came running past with 
their backs turned to the city. Fly fly cried 
they the storm has gathered in awful terror in 
front. The road itself rocks and quakes with the 
tumult in the air and the forms of hideous beasts 
peer through the darkness. Fly or nothing can 
save thee. 
What! away from the holy city? cried 
Cyril in dismay I cannot do that. Oh no 
no if I have been fool enough to be thus mistaken 
at least I will burst through every peril to 
reach my longed for home. 
As you will said they we at least cannot 
hesitate for death is pursuing us. 
So saying they rushed wildly on as a stream 
of lightning seemed to rend the sky and pursue 
them along the very pathway. 
The glare of light showed Cyril the road 
which stood clearly out. 
Fearless of danger he instantly stepped into 
the track of the electric fluid and advanced heavenward. 
As he did so a cry burst on his ear. 
The two youths who had just passed him overtaken 
by the lightning in whose track he walked 
were scorched by the fiery messenger and lay on 
either side of the road monuments of His vengeance 
against those who turn from Him. While 
to Cyril each step became clearer and more dis 
l 
<pb>
tinct of the way which he had been shown and 
he could hear voices through the war of elements 
cheering him on and calling him to his 
home. 
Another turn in the path and the boy met a 
messenger from the king's palace. 
Why do you delay v said he. The King 
wants you Edwin expects you Pietro is approaching 
the end. The night is far spent the 
day is at hand. Gird up your loins and come 
away! 
CHAPTER x 
THE APPROACH TO THE END. 
The day breaketh and the shadows flee away. 
O Jesit! King of wondrous might! 
0 Victor glorious from the light! 
Sweetness that may not be expressed 
And altogether loveliest! 
And the hour had come when Cyril too must 
pass the dark barrier and be a sojourner through 
those gloomy hills. He had overtaken Pietro 
and they had reached the opening of the great 
14* 
</div>
<pb>
<div id="the dark mountains;the terrible claimant" code="6" wordcount="5449">
dark chasm which had frowned on them so narrowly 
and terribly through so many days of their 
recent journey. 
The two youths had had many conversations 
together of late on the history of their past adventures 
and the prospect of their future ones! 
and this evening they had toiled long and far 
along the pathway they had sat down to rest 
when on looking up they descried close over 
them a building which was evidently set apart 
for the accommodation of the king's travellers. 
Let us go in said Pietro I am weary and 
long for rest. 
It is evidently intended for such as we said 
the other so we will. I fear no treachery 
from its appearance. 
So saying Cyril approached the door. Now 
the two boys had been sufficiently bound to each 
other of late in the bonds of most close friendship 
and love. They had learned to bear with each 
other's differences and to admire and love those 
points in each which the other did not possess. 
They reached the door and finding a bell with 
a quaint device they rang it. One immediately 
came at the call an old man bent with many 
years his hair grey and like one whose single 
aim is to live for others and have no thoughts of 
self. 
<pb>
Is this a resting-place for pilgrims on the 
king's highway? asked Cyril. 
Yes said he kindly and with a tone which 
showed how gladly he received such as these pilgrims 
were and right well would the King 
have all such entertained. Come come in ye 
blessed of the Lord and rest before ye go on 
upon your journey for indeed ye have reached 
the hardest part of your pilgrimage. 
We need it said Cyril seeing that the 
shadows grow long and the hills rise very high 
before us as if we were very nearly approaching 
them. 
You are indeed said he and many are 
those who have spent their last few hours to gain 
refreshment here. You will find their names 
written upon the walls of this home and many 
of their sentiments and thoughts before their last 
passage. 
Shall we? said Pietro then will that be 
most cheering and consoling to us. I dread that 
passage much and to find that others have passed 
it happily before me will much aid me. 
Even so said their guide. See here 
here is a chamber which contains the full record 
of all those who have done so. See what is 
written over the door and he pointed to where 
in large letters was marked these words 
<pb>
There hath no temptation taken you but what 
is common to man. 
Round the walls were written words of many 
who had been in that chamber just before the 
end. 
The next morning at break of early day the 
pilgrims were roused from their sleep by the 
sound of a trumpet which echoed clearly and 
loudly and that in accents through which no one 
could sleep Up up and rouse you ye who 
are about to take your last journey. 
Like soldiers starting from their bivouac at 
the alarm of battle did the boys spring up and 
girding their dress about them issued forth. The 
Dark Mountains rose close before them. 
In the chasm in which I stood I saw that the 
ascent toward them was very steep and often 
precipitous full of rocky ragged stones and as 
I have said before there were deep ravines and 
streams and lakes of dark and stagnant water 
through which each pilgrim had to pass. I was 
standing on the highest point the furthest from the 
road and nearest the heavenly country. I saw that 
no one of the pilgrims saw before them the difficulties 
into which they were going. But all went 
on as if they only saw the present and felt no 
other care. Had they seen all that was before 
<pb>
them they would be startled for difficulties 
seemed to increase on every side like the rolling 
up of clouds for a tempest and the gathering of 
waters toward the beach. Indeed I saw that no 
one on the road knew what he had to pass. The 
object of the attention of many of the pilgrims 
seemed like minute points specks in vast space. 
It surprised me that they were concerned in the 
passing trifles of a moment when such stupendous 
matters lay around. But it was the wont 
of all. They were like children catching at gossamers 
and delighted with the flight of a passing 
butterfly while death is all around or the ground 
heaves with an earthquake. 
i 
<pb>
CHAPTER xi 
THE TERRIBLE CLAIMANT. 
He accuseth the brethren. 
The brooding weight of sins long done 
Whereby I injured Thee 
Before Thy look as at the sun 
The morning shadows flee. 
From all and every side I could see the marshalling 
of azrael's host as if to a terrible battle 
and I saw those horses breathing fire and the 
dark and rapid chariot and the dreadful form 
leaning forward and urging the horses on. It 
was clear enough that from all around azrael's 
army was being summoned to hinder the boys on 
their last passage. I never saw such vindictiveness 
such multitudes such silence and all were 
arming from every side against one feeble boy for 
Cyril now was the point of attack. How 
could he cope with them? How meet them? I 
trembled for him. Yet he certainly was ignorant 
of any danger being at hand. It was like the 
gathering of clouds over a still evening the 
drawing together of a waterspout or a whirlwind 
upon some stately and gallant vessel. 
<pb>
I saw to my delight that though these armies 
of evil ones were closing in on all sides the figure 
of Him who had throughout been by cyril's side 
stood with outstretched arms before him at the 
head of the chasm and the attitude in which He 
stood made him so conspicuous that many of the 
weapons aimed at Cyril struck on Him. His eye 
was all vigilant and no movement of the foe appeared 
to have been so sudden as not to have 
been anticipated by Him. 
Among the many forms which followed close 
on Cyril I recognised many who had pursued 
him in the earlier part of the journey and as he 
entered the defiles stretched out their spectral 
hands to him crying You are mine. You 
yielded yourself to me at that day and hour. I 
claim you as my own! I noticed the forms of 
many of these separately. 
First came one exceedingly pale and wan with 
bloodshot fiery eyes and a sweet but most mournful 
voice. His dress was floating in pale folds 
from his lank and skeletonlike frame withered 
flowers hung dropping from his brow like a faded 
crown which in vain he strove to keep around 
his head on his brow was written Lust and 
I guessed the reason of his exceeding paleness. 
He felt he now had no hold on Cyril none 
<pb>
Still he was urged on by a terrible voice which 
broke from behind the mist which I knew to be 
azrael's which said Claim him seize him! 
Bring yon young boy to me before he enter that 
chasm or you shall be bound in everlasting 
chains and in darkness forever and ever! and 
the rattle of a chain rung in the ears of the miserable 
spectre. It gibbered as it raised and 
laid its shadowy hand on Cyril. 
The boy shrunk back and looking the being 
full in the face I saw his countenance fell and 
he trembled exceedingly. 
What do you want said Cyril. I thought 
I had done with thee pale awful being. 
No no said the other with mournful tones 
which despite their sorrowfulness had something 
of sweetness in them say not so. You loved 
me once in the journey of life and you cannot be 
rid of me now. Nay I am exceeding dear to 
those who knew me. 
Away away horrible shadow! cried the 
poor boy covering his eyes with his hands. 
Do not haunt me now I have done with thee 
oh I thought forever! 
Nay nay said the mournful voice that 
you cannot do. Here mark the record of your 
former allegiance and my present rightful claim 
by that you are mine! 
<pb>
So saying the shadow for so to one who stood 
on the hill it seemed to be drew aside its vail 
and showed a record written as it seemed on his 
bosom For three weeks along the sixteenth 
year of the journey of life Cyril followed me and 
loved me called me his own and bid me call him 
mine and forsaking the guide of his youth gave 
himself to me. By this young boy I claim 
thee. Ere scarce seventeen summers had woven 
chaplets for thy life you loved and followed me 
and you are mine. 
Away horrible shadow cried the boy most 
bitterly and shrinking from the touch. 
Nay nay cried the other with a shout 
which made the dark valley ring again you are 
mine mine mine! No power no hand in 
earth or heaven can save you! Come follow 
me! and the being laid his hand on cyril's 
shoulder and drew him away. 
The boy seemed as if spellbound and as if 
he was compelled to own the truth of the claim 
turned to go after him. At that moment the 
curtain of mist which vailed the side of the hill 
drew away and I saw hell open and azrael's 
form and the dark chariots and those horses 
and I saw horrible forms and sights of the damned. 
And I noticed all on which my eye fell had written 
on their brow Lost for lust! And as the 
15 
<pb>
mist drew away multitudes rushed toward the 
journey of life and strove with straining agony 
to recover their footing upon it. Their struggles 
and desperate efforts and the yells of laughing 
Hope were terrible in the extreme. For in a 
manner I could hardly imagine that Journey 
of Life seemed dear to them. 
Oh for one single hour more upon that 
blessed road said one poor wretch even 
though it be at the end even though it be the 
last step through the gloomy portal. 
And he laid his hand on the stone which edged 
the pathway and with a struggle which seemed 
likely to make every muscle crack he heaved up 
his figure when the stone gave way and he fell 
back from the path of Life into the bottomless 
pit of despair. His shriek of disappointed agony 
thrilled through me oh the blessedness of being 
in that journey of Life while yet it may be called 
The Journey Home. 
But Cyril Cyril where are you? You are 
not to sink into yonder awful pit after all your 
efforts to reach home? 
I looked and the pale form led him on. 
Cyril burst from him. 
I belong to another and not to thee. I 
never was thine save for a miserable hour and 
I renounced thee. 
<pb>
A miserable hour! said the other laughing 
many and many a miserable hour over and over 
again. 
Yes yes true dreadfully true but I never 
continued with thee. I broke away from the allegiance 
and went back to Him I loved oh how 
dearly jesus Jesus my Master my Saviour 
my Friend have you left me now? I have 
sinned oh woe is me. I cast all my care on 
Thee who hast cared for me. 
At this cry a scene most wonderful burst upon 
me. 
I saw the waxen tablet had inscribed on it in 
large characters the word Jesus. 
As Cyril spoke he joined his hands and turned 
toward the Dark Mountains. The clouds rolled 
away and a voice full of unsurpassed comfort 
broke from the centre 
Cyril you are Mine you are bought with a 
price. I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. 
I blotted out like a thick cloud thy transgressions 
and your sin and iniquity will I remember 
no more. 
Then did the Holy One hold up the Book in 
which all our sins were written and showed that 
from the pages on which these sins had been 
written against Cyril all was blotted out and 
forever. 
<pb>
The peace and joy which beamed on the boy's 
happy countenance time will never efface from 
my memory. Would that when I approach the 
Dark Mountains blessed Jesus my hope may be 
the same! 
I heard voices of joy break forth as if from the 
heavenly city rejoicing over Cyril and triumphing 
because he had overcome his adversary and 
it said the 
righteous shall have dominion in the 
morning weeping may endure for a night 
but joy cometh in the morning in the evening 
there shall be light who shall lay aught to 
the charge of Mine elect? it is God that justifieth 
who is he that condemneth? it is Christ 
that died Hallelujah for the Lord God 
Omnipotent reigneth and He shall reign forever 
and ever Lord of lords and King of kings. 
While this glorious hymn was bursting forth 
I looked at the Evil One and I saw that he had 
been seized by azrael's command and was being 
wreathed with everlasting chains because ho had 
failed in making good his charge and he would 
as I was told be bound in the bottomless pit. 
And I saw one poor wretch who had raised 
himself up to the edge of the Path of Life and 
was struggling with an effort to keep his hold 
thereon while every muscle started with the 
<pb>
effort and his straining eyes were fixed upon Him 
who stood in the chasm of the mountains and he 
said Jesus Jesus have mercy on me. Why 
may I not be pardoned? 
Then as he was dragged back again into the 
pit I heard a voice cry Remember you did 
not repent before you died. 
Then he said and if I had repented would 
that have made all the difference? I scorned His 
mercy. I walked once in the way of Life. 
Then the voice answered When a righteous 
man turneth away from his righteousness and 
committeth iniquities and dieth in them for his 
iniquity which he hath done he shall die. 
And I saw him no more for he was drawn back 
to destruction. 
So Cyril went some steps further into the dark 
chasm. But he was not to have peace yet for 
another figure had followed him with a garland 
also pale and spectral like the last. It was of 
one tall and more vigorous and full of confidence. 
He was dressed I saw gaily nay splendidly 
his eyes were flashing with a look of most presumptuous 
confidence and he dogged cyril's 
steps among the Dark Mountains. On his head 
was written Pride of Life and over his garments 
were written along the hems many sentences 
all denoting his name Pride Spiritual 
15* 
<pb>
Pride Pride of Intellect Independency 
and so forth. I trembled when he approached 
for I did not think Cyril seemed so alarmed at 
his coming as he was at the last. 
Cyril said his pursuer you are mine. 
Nay said the boy I belong not to thee 
I belong to another master now. And as he 
spoke that now though he trembled I thought 
he seemed too easy with the awful accuser so near 
him. 
No no said the other you know me we 
were long friends together. You shall not escape 
me now. See here the many times you 
have written your name in my book. I bear 
marks of you everywhere. Come do not look 
so scared as you enter these dark hills. If you 
go among them you must let me come with 
you. 
Oh no said the boy looking uneasy 
none enter these depths with high thoughts. 
All must bow their head on entering here. I 
am sorry I had aught to say to thee ever. Away 
away. 
Nay I will not be bid away in that fashion 
said the other and since you will not have me 
willingly you shall unwillingly. So saying 
the spectre advanced up the dark chasm by 
cyril's side saying You are mine and none 
<pb>
shall take thee from me. I will come and plead 
my right at the feet of the King and. show Him 
you are mine so gay and fine a youth as you is 
surely not to to enter the melancholy road after 
your triumphant journey without my attendance 
30 come! 
Cyril for a few paces walked beside his gay 
companion and was a little cheered by his presence 
and cheering conversation for the way was 
exceeding dreary and cold and lonely beyond 
word sad cries and squeals and shrieks were 
heard around and the darkness grew intense. 
I began to tremble for Cyril and to fear lest indeed 
he was undone. Then of a sudden a ray 
of light illumined the valley and shone on a huge 
piece of rock by the side. There were letters 
deeply engraven on it and the words were these 
I once had a vain confident spirit and thought 
I had right to enter this valley on the strength 
of my deep feeling and earnest desire but I 
found it otherwise and most humbly do I now 
enter this valley trusting only to Jesus my Lord 
and His infinite mercy. A name of a saint of 
Jesus was written after. The eye of Cyril rested 
for a moment on it and he started up from a 
long reverie and he said Away away thou 
false one I have nought to do with thee 
away! But the spectre laid hold on Cyril 
<pb>
violently saying as the other had done Thou 
art mine. 
Then Cyril again raised the Name of Jesus 
oh the power of that Name which is above 
every name for at that moment the Voice came 
saying Fear not I am with thee all your 
transgressions shall not be mentioned. 
Then Cyril turned and said Blessed Jesus 
I did once obey that flatterer I confess my sin 
oh woe is me! And the Yoice said Fear 
not I have put away thy sin thou art mine 
nothing can take thee from Me. 
Then Cyril went on again with joy and shouts 
of joy burst from the heavenly city and the 
Evil One was hurled cursing the name of the 
Lord into the pit of destruction. 
Yet again I saw cyril's assailants attack him. 
He was not to get quietly to the harbour of his 
eternal refuge where the wicked cease from 
troubling and the weary are at rest 
On the brow of this newcomer was inscribed 
the name of Unbelief. at least thou art 
mine said the Evil One laying hold on Cyril. 
Thou art mine and thou shalt come with me to 
that distant home where we shall share eternity 
together. A lurid light played round his form 
as he spoke and the ghastly countenance which 
<pb>
was now seen peering from the folds of the dress 
made me shudder. Cyril trembled. Oh no 
said he if I listened to thy call and thy suggestion 
thou knowest dark one I have hated 
thee and renounced thee. Oh Jesus Jesus 
mercy! But the awful one had encircled him in 
his dreadful embrace and escape seemed to be 
hopeless. 
Boy cried the hollow sepulchral voice 
you cannot deny having listened to me having 
inscribed your name in my book having made 
yonrself my slave. It is all very well to follow 
me when life is gay and strong and now that 
you enter the Dark Mountains to leave me and 
follow my hated rival. No. Be once mine always 
mine. If you have now been my willing 
companion in the journey be my willing slave 
forever. 
Cyril turned. His eye fell on the face of 
Jesus. My Lord and my God cried the boy 
stretching out his hands to Him who stood gazing 
on His beloved servant with the eye of more than 
mother's love. 
Fear not dear traveller along life's highway. 
It is My good pleasure to give you the kingdom. 
If even for a fleeting moment you listened to My 
enemy you listened to Me and loved Me more 
<pb>
dearly than you did him and where is he that 
can pluck you out of Mine hand? 
So saying I saw the Blessed One advance down 
the ravine toward Cyril and the awful one fled away. 
The everlasting arm was round the boy and the 
eye of love welcomed him with forgiveness toward 
heaven. Oh yes indeed give glory to 
the Lord your God before your feet stumble 
upon the Dark Mountains. 
I looked away i'wanted to see the rest of 
edwin's family. I turned again but Cyril was 
gone. All was silent. Where was he? Had 
he entered the land of his rest the hope of his 
refuge 1 or had the evil one born him away? 
<pb>
CHAPTER xii 
THE GATES OF THE CITY. 
Come unto Me all ye that are weary and heavy laden and I 
will give you rest. 
Brief life is here oar portion 
Brief sorrow short-lived care 
The life that knows no ending 
The tearless life is there. 
Oh happy retribution! 
Short toil eternal rest! 
For mortals and for sinners 
A mansion with the blessed! 
Being most anxious to see how Cyril and those 
who followed him would enter the glorious land 
and the holy city which they had so long called 
their own I thought I would draw toward the 
Dark Mountains from which place I should get 
a clearer sight of all which was going on among 
these various pilgrims. Though the laud of the 
shadow of death was but imperfectly seen or understood 
by the travellers who approached it 
from heights around it it was exceedingly easy 
to see all the paths which led to it right to its 
furthest end. So much so that every pilgrim as 
he passed through it lingered on the edges of 
<pb>
these mournful ways and tablelands and gazed 
at the path he had travelled and along which 
others were coining and as the travellers looked 
I perceived how astonished they often were at 
the dangers they had overcome and the love 
which had led them hitherto. 
Near this for a few brief moments David gazed 
on the past as if it were a map when he said as 
he looked at it folding his hands together and 
looking up 
Her foundation is in the holy mountains. The 
Lord loveth the gates of Zion more than all the 
dwellings of Jacob. Glorious things are spoken 
of thee O city of God. 
Here they told me old Jacob lingered a few minutes 
before he entered his rest and seeing it said the 
days of the years of my pilgrimage are 
an hundred and thirty years few and evil have 
the days of the years of my life been and have not 
attained unto the days of the life of my fathers in 
the days of their pilgrimage. 
Here Moses paused and beheld what he had 
passed through pharaoh's house and the pleasures 
and riches of the world. 
And Moses went up from the plains of Moab 
unto the mountain of Nebo to the top of Pisgah 
that is over against Jericho. And the Lord 
showed him all the land of Gilead unto Dan. 
<pb>
And all Naphtali and the land of Ephraim and 
Manasseh and all the land of Judah unto the utmost 
sea. And the south and the plain of the valley 
of Jericho the city of palm trees unto Zoar. 
And the Lord said unto him This is the land 
which I sware unto Abraham unto Isaac and 
unto Jacob saying I will give it unto thy seed 
I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes but 
thou shalt not go over thither. 
Here St. Paul lingered ere he entered his everlasting 
home while the headsman stood by with 
his axe he said and sculptured on the rock 
I am now ready to be offered and the time 
of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good 
fight I have finished my course I have kept the 
faith henceforth there is laid up for me a crown 
of righteousness which the Lord the righteous 
Judge shall give me at that day and not to me 
only but unto all them also that love his appearing. 

There too holy Job paused and viewing his 
difficult and rough pathway by which God had 
led him said and graved it with a pen of iron 
Oh that my words were now written oh that 
they were printed in a book! That they were 
graven with an iron pen and lead in the rock forever! 
For I know that my Redeemer liveth and 
that he shall stand at the latter day upon the 
16 
<pb>
earth and though after my skin worms destroy 
this body yet in my flesh shall I see God whom 
I shall see for myself and mine eyes shall behold 
and not another though my reins be consumed 
within me. 
And here John Baptist paused and mused on 
the long and silent past and viewed the path by 
which he had come and smiled with joy at the 
glorious prospect which opened before him. 
And there were other voices than these. Here 
were written the last words of many of the glorious 
hosts of martyrs who first trod the rocky 
pavement of this valley and who delighted in 
hearing the links of the bondage of the fear of 
death clatter shivered at the cross which rose before 
them. 
There was agnes's last happy hymn recorded 
the last triumphant words of Cyprian and Alban 
Perpetua and Dorothea all who in every age and 
every clime had glorified Jesus by the martyr's 
sleep all who have loved Him to the death and 
had recorded their last hymn on the wall of the 
chasm of Death to comfort those who should 
come after. These words were more fitted for the 
bridal banquet than funeral bakemeats for entering 
the everlasting morning than the portal of 
the valley of the Shadow of Death. 
They were stoned they were sawn asunder 
<pb>
were tempted were slain with the sword they 
wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins 
being destitute afflicted tormented of whom 
the world was not worthy they wandered in 
deserts and in monntains and in dens and caves 
of the earth. And these all having obtained a 
good report through faith received not the promise 
God having provided some better thing for 
us that they without us should not be made perfect. 

Oh! yes how many have lingered there the 
last foot print left on the sand of time the last 
glance of that pale world which lay wrapped in coldest 
moonlight below the last look before they 
entered the home of joy unspeakable where God 
had provided wonderful things for those that 
loved Him. Happy lingerers! happy sojourners 
on life's remotest bound! Would that I were 
with you too to enter into the joy of your Lord J 
And now Cyril stood there aud read the words 
inscribed in the wall. He imagined he heard 
their dear voices calling sweetly Come away 
enter into the joy of your Lord. 
A messenger had more than once touched 
Cyril and laid his hand on his shoulder and said 
earnestly Come the Master calls thee. 
I come how gladly! said the really happy 
boy and he tore himself away from Pietro whose 
<pb>
cry of mingled love and sorrow I could hear even 
where I was standing And they saw one another 
no more for Cyril had already gone round a point 
in the hills and Pietro continued his journey alone. 
As Cyril turned he was gazing on scenes of rapturous 
delight and his beaming eye was fixed 
upon things beyond me which I had not seen. 
I looked further beyond the Dark Mountains 
beyond the deep ravines beyond the clouds which 
overshadowed the hills I saw the heavenly city 
the gates stood open as if for some one long expected 
long hoped for the city seemed boundless 
though I had but an imperfect view of it for 
it was very very far away. I could see many 
moving within to and fro and there was great preparations 
making as for a feast at the return of 
some long lost son some traveller weary of a night 
journey. The road lay open up to the hill which 
was called the Mount Zion the city of the living 
God the city which lieth four square all of 
whose foundations are precious stones that city 
whose builder and maker is God that city of 
which very excellent things are spoken that city 
at whose corners Wisdom crieth and which hath 
no need of the sun or moon but the Lord God 
is the light thereof and he reigneth forever and 
ever. 
<pb>
Up the path Cyril went happy boy his warfare 
was accomplished his radiant dress glittered 
like starlight his face was uplifted toward the 
heavenly Jerusalem his hand still held the cross 
the dear and blessed emblem of his conflict and 
his victory. The tablet was bound on his breast 
and on it one name alone was written Jesus. All 
the difference that I saw in the cross was that now 
there was a crown. The dark hills lay far behind 
him wrapped in dimness and shadows. 
But now He appeared by cyril's side without 
Whom was no admission. It was He Whose 
Name is as ointment poured forth. Once 
only I heard a voice and I saw no more the 
voice was cyril's the words were these 
Oh that I once could have loved for one instant 
any but Thee! oh that I could have cared for 
sin sin hateful horrible word. Now I love 
holiness purity truth and love. In Thee I find 
them all centred. Whom have I blessed Jesus 
in heaven but Thee the chief among ten thousand 
and altogether lovely. 
And as he spoke sweet indescribable music 
rolled upward into infinite space. Cyril turned. 
A footstep attracted his notice. Pietro was by 
his side. Oh Cyril! said the boy as he fell 
upon his neck my own my beloved friend! 
companion of my long and erring journey shall 
16* 
<pb>
we enter home together? Blessed forever blessed 
be His dear Name! He has born me in His arms 
through the Dark Mountains and the music which 
fell on my ear was I know thy frame I remember 
thou art but dust The gate again closed 
and two redeemed ones gathered into the fold. 
THE END. 
<pb>
<pb>
<pb>
</div>
<pb>
