0	to the latter, and it is in this section on style that the case should have been most strongly made. Unfortunately the thematic approach that has characterized so much Bernanos criticism has also been allowed to dictate Dr O'Sharkey's approach and the opportunity has been lost. In addition to this general matter there are a number of omissions and points of detail to which attention should be drawn. The notes both to the Introduction and to the text of the novel are extremely variable. Those which clarify points of Catholic doctrine or which indicate certain similarities between Bernanos and Pascal are both necessary and rewarding; others like the brief biographical details of Bernanos' contemporary writers on pages 9-14 are not. There are also occasions when Dr O'Sharkey has been unnecessarily imprecise: why do we read on page 263 that 'Torcy appears to have a special devotion to St [sic] Jeanne d'Arc' (and why do we always have the French version of her name ? ); on page 276 that 'Bernanos appears to have read and been influenced by the novels of Dostoevsky'; and on page 269 that 'Dufrety appears to have failed to live up to the heroic demands of his vocation'? In each case has would have been both simpler and more correct. There is no reference to the episode in which the cure is discovered by Seraphita and which closely resembles the Way of the Cross (pp. 202-6); missed too is the significance of the Imitation (p. I76), the symbolic diet of bread and wine, the interesting reference to Coty (pp. 99, Ioo), and the deliberate association of Torcy and Luther (p. 98). The confusion of Dufrety and Duprety has been left unchanged though that of Mile and Mme Louise has been corrected. There is also one factual error that should be recorded. Like Michel Esteve in his notes to the Pleiade edition of Bernanos' (Euvres romanesques (Paris, I96i) Dr O'Sharkey is incorrect when she implies that only the first part of the novel was serialized in the Revue hebdomadaire.
1	Not only did it appear in its entirety between November 1935 and February 1936, but the text also contains numerous differences from that eventually published by Plon in March. Finally the Bibliography like that in Jurt's book contains a number of omissions, the most striking of all being Michel Esteve's edition of the novel published in the 'Livre de poche' series in I964. Others are Milner's book and Yves Bridel's L'Esprit de l'enfance dans l'fuvre romanesque de Bernanos (Paris, 1966), both of which contain substantial chapters on the Journal d'un cure' de campagne. Details of the various articles contained in the second volume of the ttudes bernanosiennes would also have been welcome. Even if the sole purpose of this edition is simply to introduce Bernanos and the Journal d'un cure de campagne to the English reader the fact that it has simplified a number of important aspects and has omitted others altogether means that it can be no more than moderately successful. If instead of following other critics by showing how this particular novel illustrates a number of major themes in Bernanos' work, Dr O'Sharkey had concentrated on it as a novel in its own right, a more rewarding piece of work could well have emerged. J JOHN FLOWER NORWICH The Poetics and the Poetry of Rene Char. By VIRGINIA A. LA CHARITE. (University of North Carolina Studies in the Romance Languages and Literatures, 75) Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. I968. 260 pp. $6.50. In her introduction to this book Dr Virginia La Charit6 suggests that the general trend in studies of Char has been to treat his work as an organic whole. Her aim is to take the opposite approach and examine his evolution chronologically, through successive stages of development. She recognizes six such stages between 1923 and I966, each one characterized by a slightly different approach to poetry, and each 650 Reviews Reviews 65I given, therefore, a general title of the type: 'A Poetics of Creative Activity', 'A Poetics of Moral Responsibility', and so on. These chapter headings give a good idea of the emphasis in the book.
2	Despite its title, it is much more concerned with poetics than with poetry. Dr La Charite's analysis of themes concentrates on ideas and attitudes rather than on literary realization, and her examination of textual points leans towards the conceptual rather than the stylistic. The danger of this approach is that of giving an excessively schematic impression of the work being studied, and, on the whole, Dr La Charite tends to err in this direction. The reader might never guess from her analyses that Char's poetry is extremely varied in texture and quality, going from the obscure to the concrete, and the precious to the sensuous. The discussion is so firmly aimed at theory that it tends to overlook these and other immediate facts of reading experience. This is a pity, for much remains to be done, in Char criticism, on the level of direct literary analysis. It is true that the critical tendency has been to approach his work globally, and one main result of this has been a failure to discriminate sufficiently between his sometimes arbitrary obscurities (particularly evident in the earlier volumes) and his best work. To take one very relevant example, however important a method of expression the aphorism may be for Char himself, his commentators should not expect the reader to accept it automatically as an adequate literary form. An 'aesthetic' of the aphorism still needs to be offered to readers who are often genuinely puzzled by it. Perhaps a comparison with Eluard - briefly made but not developed in this book- might throw light on the specific nature of Char's use of this form. As a sustained essay on Char's poetics, therefore, this study might appear rather laborious to some readers, in so far as it is not enlivened by a sharper critical sense. A different view of it emerges, however, if one is prepared to use it selectively, via the index, for comments on individual works. For at this level, in contrast with the over-general nature of the main argument, Dr La Charite has often rewarding remarks to make on precise textual points. This is particularly true of her discussion of examples of the different kinds of textual revision - title changes, deletions, re-shuffling in the order of poems, etc. - that Char has carried out in his various volumes.
3	To this she adds three informative appendices: the third of these, which gives a complete list of variants, will be particularly useful. Similarly the biblio- graphy of Char's works is meticulously clear and comprehensive. One can thus find in the book something like the beginnings of an excellent critical edition. It requires a good use of the index, and a certain amount of collation, to get at it; but for readers closely interested in Char the effort will be worth while. STIRLING S. I. LOCKERBIE Aspetti di Jean Genet. Edited by ENEA BALMAS. (Studi di Letteratura Francese, I, 1967: Biblioteca dell' 'Archivum Romanicum', Serie I, vol. 89) Firenze: Olschki. 1967. xvi + 74 PP. Jean Genet's opinion of the Italians is not high. 'Les Italiens ne jouissent ni de ma sympathie ni de mon estime', he confided one day in 1960 to Lucio Attinelli; 'les Italiens, a deux ou trois exceptions pres, ignorent toute conception sensee ou profonde de la vie'. By and large, the dislike seems to be mutual. All the more welcome, therefore, is this special number of the Studi di Letteratura Francese, for the I20-odd pages which it devotes to the 'poeta maledetto' represent by far the most extensive conspectus of criticism which has as yet appeared in the Italian language. Even so, there is a certain air of apology about the whole venture
