0	DIANNE F. SADOFF Storytelling and the Figure of the Father in Little Dorrit "Look'ee here, Pip. I'm your second father." The discovery is made [that Ralph Nickleby was Smike's father], Ralph is dead, the loves have come all right, . . . and I have now only to break up Dotheboys and the book together.1 OUBLING and discovery inhere in a clas- sical narrative's metaphors and in its structures. Doubling implies resemblance, analogy, identity, but also difference; the ele- ments of a narrative-structure, character, plot -all make use of metaphor and its opposite (double), catachresis. The hinges in a story hang events together: and then this happened, and it was like-or unlike-that earlier thing that hap- pened. Event sometimes carries the weight of forecast, of destiny, of prophecy: this will or might well happen. Scenes in stories, actions symbolic and narrative, would make no sense without metaphor and catachresis as figures of comparison. So we might say that doubling and metaphor as a structural device inhere especially in all long narratives, all "loose and baggy mon- sters." Dickens, Eliot, and Trollope, among others, bind the triple-decker together with met- aphor to create a story of several classes, a tale with many centers. Reading the multiple-plotted novel, in fact, the reader engages in a meta- phorical activity based on perception of resem- blance and difference during reading time: Does one "central" plot make other stories subplots? Do all the plots together create one inevitable meaning, one transcendental signified? Do the several plots demonstrate discontinuities, ironies, and differences among themselves?' Dickens and his recent critics would have us, as readers, choose our middle alternative, which is to de- fine stories as metaphorical, as creating similarity and resemblance-the matrix of analogy. Yet Dickens' narratives often demonstrate inevitable discontinuity.
1	Bleak House, for example, at- tempts to persuade us of the ultimate and in- 234 evitable congruence between public and private versions of order, but it ironically persuades us of the incongruence between public disorder, embodied in the omniscient narrator's tale of Chancery, and private order, embodied in Esther Summerson's tale of her life.3 The reader in- terprets a life, then, and its larger context with the help of metaphor, the figure of doubling, resemblance, and failure to resemble. The story of a life, even the life of a public institution like Chancery or the Circumlocution Office, is a tale of origins and ends, of purposes, motivations, consequences, outcomes, geneal- ogies, fatherhood. The reader interprets a life with the tools of metonymy: first this happened, then that. When Silas Marner, the figure of dis- continuity and wandering, appears in Raveloe with a pack on his back, the community fails to explain his presence because no one knows his father or mother, his home, or his origin. The novel ends when Silas himself becomes a "father" and his "daughter," Eppie, rejects her "real" father in favor of her foster and "present" father. As Silas Marner demonstrates, the structures of multiple-plotted narrative combine issues about the family with temporality; genealogy provides a chronology, a linear and causal sequence, within which a story resides.4 Narrative acquires its authority by reference to familial and other origins, by forewarnings of deaths and ends, how- ever equivocal those origins and ends appear. In this sense, the multiple-plotted narrative, like all texts structured by the double-figurative and grammatical-nature of language, never achieves total congruity or closure of its several stories. According to George Eliot's narrator, for ex- ample, "Every limit is a beginning as well as an ending. "- Narrative teleology, that is, narrative purpose, tendency, and endpoint, shapes, and is shaped by, a life story, a father begetting and generating, a mother giving birth, a child marry- ing and begetting or dying or both.
2	Narrative origins and narrative endpoint, or Dianne F, Sadoff knowledge, disentanglement, and undoubling- in short, the narrative urge-are figured, ac- cording to Roland Barthes, by the father: The pleasure of the text is not the pleasure of the corporeal striptease or of narrative suspense. ... This is an Oedipal pleasure (to denude, to know, to learn the origin and the end) if it is true that every narrative (every unveiling of the truth) is a staging of the (absent, hidden, or hypostatized) father- which would explain the solidarity of narrative forms, of family structures, and of prohibitions of nudity, all collected in our culture in the myth of Noah's sons covering his nakedness. Death of the Father would deprive literature of many of its pleasures. If there is no longer a Father, why tell stories? Doesn't every narrative lead back to Oedipus? Isn't storytelling always a way of search- ing for one's origin, speaking one's conflicts with the Law, entering into the dialectic of tenderness and hatred? ; Barthes's principal metaphor for narrative se- quence, for the origination and engendering of a story, is paternity, or the son's search for the father. The author seeks patriarchal authority, and narrative sequence embodies that search. Narrative discovery, as the Nickleby epigraph is meant to suggest, defines the father's relationship to his son, the closure of narrative as the death of (or accommodation with) the father, and, by analogy, the legitimacy of authorship as paternal. In fact, the OED, using references to Pope, Lamb, and Thackeray, gives one definition of "author" as "one who begets," a "father," an "ancestor." Dickens himself used the metaphor of paternity to deny the legitimacy of writing spuriously attributed to him; of an ersatz con- tinuation of Pickwick and a paper by Father Prout, Dickens announced that he "decidedly objects to fathering anybody else's articles" (Pil- grim Letters, i, 217, 433).
3	We also know that Dickens spoke metaphorically of himself as par- ent to his characters, most notably in the preface to David Copperfield: "It will be easily believed that I am a fond parent to every child of my fancy, and that no one can ever love that family as dearly as I love them. But, like many fond parents, I have in my heart of hearts a favourite child. And his name is DAVID COPPERFIELD. "7 As that novel demonstrates, in becoming an author the unhappy son attains maturity and becomes his own father, fathers himself. In Little Dorrit, Dickens likewise demon- strates, although in a different way, that the purpose of narrative, including the narrative about purpose or vocation, is to seek the figure of the father, to write the paternal metaphor, and to acquire paternal authority. This multiple- plotted novel tells two major stories-or a double story-one about Amy Dorrit, the other about Arthur Clennam, and attempts to bring the two narratives (and characters) together at the novel's close with a marriage that bridges antithesis and creates symbolic unity. Behind this narrative project stands the father, the figure of law and of oedipal prohibition and desire. Both the story of a son and the story of a daughter involve con- fronting the father, one absent (dead), the other all too present. The father, a figure of resem- blance and difference, of origin as aim and as end, links the two narratives and provides the novel's teleology. Dickens associates the figure of the father with purpose and authority: creating children, like creating the sons and daughters of Little Dorrit, should cure aimlessness, empower authority, adumbrate genealogical continuity, and shape narrative sequence. Yet Dickens dis- covers in telling the stories of Amy and Arthur that the narrative search for the father's author- ity makes the father, authority, and narrative knowledge of end and origin problematic. The curiously overdetermined ending of Little Dorrit represses the narrative's discoveries about pa- ternity, about the father's failure to create "chil- dren" authoritatively and responsibly. Dickens' story of a son, Arthur Clennam, nar- rates a public search for purpose, for vocation.
4	Yet when we first encounter Clennam, in the Marseilles quarantine, he confesses his utter lack of direction to Mr. Meagles: "I am such a waif and stray everywhere, that I am liable to be drifted where any current may set.... I have no will. That is to say . . . next to none that I can put in action now. . . . Always grinding in a mill I always hated; what is to be expected from me in middle life? Will, purpose, hope? "s In a chapter Dickens ironically titles "Nobody's Weakness," Clennam ponders "what he was to do henceforth in life; to what occupation he should devote himself, and in what direction he 235 Storytelling and the Figure of the Father in Little Dorrit had best seek it" (p. 231). Clennam is the weak "nobody," but he is also blameless in the face of his embraced, even courted, failures. Thinking he goes to the Circumlocution Office to help the Dorrits, for example, Clennam goes in part as an "exercise in perseverance" (p. 154), for he ex- pects that he will fail to beat the system as others before him have failed. In fact, as he knows, the "purpose" of this revolving office is to destroy his already damaged will, "to set bounds to the philanthropy, to cramp the charity, to fetter the public spirit, to contract the enterprise, to damp the independent self-reliance, of its people" (p. 455). A vocation, in the form of the helpless Daniel Doyce, however, providentially finds Clennam at the Circumlocution Office. What is the business of the newly formed firm of Doyce and Clennam, and is this really Clennam's long-sought voca- tion? We hardly know. Despite our uncertainty about what Clennam makes or accomplishes at The Works, Clennam claims a "feeling of plea- sure in his pursuit that was new to him." Yet we never see Clennam working or enjoying his work.
5	Dickens makes his usual claims for the value of work but fails to show us that value in the action of the novel, just as he fails to do so at the end of Pip's great expectations. In fact, Dickens fills his metaphorical description of work at The Works with violence and ambiguity: the benches, vices, tools, straps, and wheels, "in gear with the steam-engine, went tearing round as though they had a suicidal mission to grind the business to dust and tear the factory to pieces"; a trapdoor lets in a shaft of light that reminds Clennam of "the child's old picture-book, where similar rays were the witnesses of Abel's murder" (pp. 312- 13). Clennam works with the money, however, not with the machines, and in the counting- house Dickens removes Clennam from the noise and the devilish figures covered with iron and steel filings; he protects Clennam from the self- destructive violence and fratricide he figuratively associates with The Factory and so refuses Clennam's implicit identification with Cain, a murderous and exiled son and brother. Dickens' figurative language of violence aimed at the brother, or double, and ultimately at the self creates and mediates ironic, oedipal tensions in Clennam's public vocation. Clennam's troubles with vocation, as meta- phor demonstrates, are intimately bound up with his sonhood. Early in the narrative, he declares will, purpose, and hope "extinguished before [he] could sound the words" (p. 59). Clennam ap- parently lost his sense of purpose as an infant, before he attained the power of speech; his lan- guage, his sense of himself as still a child in- capable of speech, metaphorically blames his family for his continuing will-lessness and identi- fies him as a son. Indeed, the "mill he grinds in" is his father's business, which "exiles" the meta- phorical Cain and crushes his sense of purpose. The father asserts his power of precedence over the son, metaphorically castrating him, making him infirm and aimless. Yet this powerful father resembles, as well as differs from, his son.
6	Like the "slip-shod, purposeless, down-at-heel" Tip Dorrit (p. 116), Clennam has a constitutional, or genealogical, problem with idleness: Clen- nam's father, like Clennam himself, was "an un- decided, irresolute chap" (p. 224). The paternal metaphor identifying the son with the father has worked too well: the son becomes a repetition of the father, and genealogy proves to be an ironic, paradoxical inheritance of paternal failure and lack of authority. Clennam carries a double burden of guilt with regard to the father: the ironic double reference to the Bible-Clennam as Cain and Clennam as Prodigal Son-implies that only when the father is dead can the un- prodigal, exiled son return home to confront, surreptitiously, his sonhood. Clennam's first vocation, once begun, gives way to a second: his attempt to help the Dorrit family get out of prison. Clennam, however, again deceives himself with regard to his pur- pose, with which he unconsciously attempts to alleviate his mysterious and motiveless feelings of guilt. Whenever Clennam thinks about voca- tion and occupation, he finds his ability to act blocked by the "misgiving that there was some one with an unsatisfied claim upon his justice" (p. 231). Because his mother is kind to Little Dorrit and to no one else, Clennam irrationally connects Little Dorrit's family with his own per- vading sense of guilt and family hatred: "What if any act of [his mother's] and of his father's, should have even remotely brought the grey heads of those two [Dorrit] brothers so low" (p. 129). No logical reason can be given why Clennam makes such connections, primarily be- 236 Dianne F. cause the narrative motive is sexual: "purpose" gets mixed up with the family as origin, with potency and engendering, as Clennam unknow- ingly attempts to become father to Little Dorrit by "altering her whole manner of life, smooth- ing her rough road, and giving her a home .
7	. . as his adopted daughter" (p. 231). The second vocation, then, becomes as metaphorically double as the first. In liberating a family apparently con- nected to his own, Clennam seeks to liberate his sense of his purpose and to transform himself from family-bound son to freedom-engendering father. Clennam's second vocation succeeds better than he could have hoped, but ironically its success is also its failure. When the newly rich Dorrits leave the Marshalsea, Clennam once more finds himself vocationless; when he has apparently fulfilled his purpose of righting an old wrong, Clennam's feelings of guilt, idleness, passivity, and lack of purpose reassert them- selves. Clennam's guilt now centers on his mother, and his vocation now consists of finding out the "secret" of her house in order to "shake off" his "paralysis." His "indomitable" mother, however, renders him "completely powerless" and makes his "energy, activity, money, credit, all his resources whatsoever . . . useless." His desire to track down his feelings of guilt, to name their origin, becomes inextricably linked to a mysterious "shame and exposure" that hangs over his mother and over "his father's memory" (pp. 742-43). Dickens' evasive rhetoric and his body metaphors reveal the sexual component of Clennam's vocation: his impotence-or his mother's castration of him-can be cured only by his exposing her shamefully and learning her secrets, of both body (house) and identity. Again, Clennam's vocation signifies an attempt to be- come, to replace, the father. Clennam feels guilty -but doesn't know it-primarily because of his father's adultery and his mother's resulting dis- inheritance of Amy Dorrit. His purpose is to track down his parentage, to discover the history of his bastardy through metaphorical sexual knowledge of his mother.
8	This aggressive act of incest will metaphorically cure the aggressions and desires structured into the oedipal family and will place Clennam in the position of re- placing his own father.!' Clennam's search for vocation appears as a metaphor for sexual and Sadoff 237 paternal knowledge, for incest and self-origina- tion. Yet knowledge and replacement of the father are central to a story of sonhood. The myth of Oedipus is a drama of discovery, a tragedy of a son who comes to know his parentage too late. The tale told by many tellers makes paternity a metaphor for narrative sequence and insists on the son's knowledge of origin as a consequence of storytelling. Dickens' tale of paternity in Little Dorrit, however, averts oedipal tragedy and exile by eliding the son's knowledge. But Clennam's equivocal and metaphorical vocations find their opposites in his two grotesque and knowing doubles, Rigaud and Miss Wade. The criminal Rigaud pervades the novel, yet he is paradoxi- cally absent from it and disguised throughout. Although we never see him actually perform a criminal act, his alleged crimes are legion: he kills his fiancee for money and social status; he kills Pet's dog "dead as the Doges" for no reason; he bribes and blackmails Mrs. Clennam. As Alexander Welsh points out, only Clennam connects Rigaud-also likened to Cain-to the mysterious crimes of the narrative.10 Rigaud, the motiveless villain, is Clennam's dark double (just as Old Nandy is Dorrit's "poor old foil"),1' and he acts out versions of Clennam's hidden and unconscious motives-incest and parricide -through sexual exploitation and murder. Rigaud's criminality, like Clennam's figurative violence, originates in his confused lineage, the mysterious circumstances of his birth. Like Clen- nam, Rigaud is a metaphorical orphan, waif, and bastard through his indeterminate nation- ality: his father is Swiss, his mother is French by blood and English by birth, and he himself was born in Belgium.
9	Rigaud, however, imagines himself deprived of aristocratic birthright. This fiction compensates for his orphanage and lack of origin: a gentleman knows his family history and his place in it; he knows his father and ac- cepts his sonhood as a prelude, in a sequential genealogy, to his own fatherhood. Social accept- ance hinges on this genealogy. To be a pariah is to have no nameable and verifiable father and thus no patriarchal line that defines inheritance and identity. Rigaud's mysterious parentage, his metaphorical orphanage, deprives him of both money and substance, of personal and social authority. Storytelling and the Figure of the Father in Little Dorrit Rigaud takes revenge against society by en- acting disguised violence against members of the upper and middle classes. Having no origin himself, he spitefully reveals hidden origin by selling the secrets of genealogy. He bribes Mrs. Clennam because he knows her secret, Clennam's parentage. Thinking himself a man whom "society has deeply wronged," Rigaud maintains that "society shall pay for it" (p. 174); "society sells itself and sells me," he says, "and I sell Society" (p. 818). Rigaud attempts to revenge his own unjust bastardy, disinheritance, and consequent social rejection by punishing those who know their fathers. Rigaud's motives parody Clennam's vocational researches, Dorrit's gentlemanly poses, and Merdle's capitalistic exploits-all of which demonstrate the doubleness of social au- thority and personal identity. Like Rigaud, Miss Wade tries to revenge her lack of origin. Again like him, she has little func- tion in the narrative. Yet she too experiences a strange kinship with Clennam, to whom she eventually exposes her indignant history. No narrative reason can be given for her act; it appears to be motiveless, but it reveals an im- portant motivational relationship between Clen- nam and Miss Wade. Like Clennam, Miss Wade is an orphan and a bastard. Pancks says of her, "I know as much about her as she knows about herself.
10	She is somebody's child-anybody's- nobody's. Put her in a room in London here with any six people old enough to be her parents, and her parents may be there for anything she knows" (p. 595). Miss Wade becomes a perfect para- dox: she has an origin and yet has none; she is somebody yet nobody; she knows all yet knows nothing. She too takes revenge against society and the concept of sexual guilt. Tattycoram and her known illegitimacy become Miss Wade's instrument of revenge against the Meagleses. Be- cause she believes in the substantive, constitu- tive properties of birth and blood, however, Miss Wade also feels guilty about her origin. She speaks of herself as a dark double of Tattycoram: "She has no name, I have no name. Her wrong is my wrong" (p. 379). Name (birth, genealogy, blood) defines substance; to be nameless signi- fies sexual guilt. The constitutive power of the name means that language is able to engender. Miss Wade knows this as no other character in Little Dorrit does. Aware of her nameless origin, she rebels against bourgeois society's false names: Tatty- coram, Pet, Blandois. She rises against "swollen patronage and selfishness, calling themselves kindness, protection, benevolence, and other fine names" (p. 734). Miss Wade-Esther Summer- son gone cynical and paranoid-represents the absolute urge to know and to name in the narra- tive: in a suicidal, murderous rage, she exposes all human intersubjectivity as debased authority and competition. She exposes her lack of origin through her writing, in the "history" she gives Clennam to read.
11	As a "writer" in a narrative full of real victims and apparent rebels (like Pancks, whose castration of The Patriarch is purely symbolic), Miss Wade does what Dickens cannot bring his hero, Clennam, or himself, as author, to do: by writing a narrative about her origin, she exposes orphanage and bastardy as the central motivation that unites social patron- age, exploitation, petit-bourgeois capitalism, and murder. Miss Wade's story covers over the pri- mary gap, the plotted evasion of the narrative; namely, that the consequence of sexual inter- course is fathering. She accepts, even glorifies, the emptiness Clennam tries to fill, the father he seeks to replace. Miss Wade's history exploits the duplicity implicit in the act of exposure, in naming: does her history, like the written history of a nation, recount "real," literal events or does it, like Tom Jones: The History of a Foundling, for example, recount another fiction of origin? Miss Wade's narrative, which Dickens, not she, entitles "The History of a Self-Tormentor," acts out Clennam's self-hatred in the way that Merdle metaphorically acts out his business-related sui- cidal urges. Her history reveals, behind its angry rhetoric of self-justification, that revenge is an appropriate if not efficacious motive, that writing out the hidden vocation of seeking one's origin is dangerous because it confirms what it attempts to deny: the father's inadequacy and his ultimate absence. As every son knows (and Dickens' exaggerated version of Miss Wade's lesbian seductions implies a masculine knowledge), the symbolic father is the dead father. Who, then, is the father in Little Dorrit? Clen- nam's, Rigaud's, and Miss Wade's stories recount versions of the dead, absent, and missing father. Yet the narrative as a whole offers us as a pres- ent father only William Dorrit, a weak and un- 238 Dianne F. Sadoff authoritative father, both publicly and privately. Dorrit's authority as Father of the Marshalsea depends wholly on an ironic and debased prece- dence, his seniority as a prison inmate.
12	His humbug gentlemanliness, his patronage and con- descension as public Father cover up an "ef- feminate style" and "irresolute hands": he lacks will and helplessly depends on those who should be dependent on him. Little Dorrit knows that "a man so broken as to be the Father of the Marshalsea, could be no father to his own chil- dren" (p. 112). Dorrit finds a paradoxical free- dom inside the prison walls. The "old jail-bird," Dr. Haggage, tells an unnamed debtor on the day the debtor's daughter is born inside the Marshal- sea, "Elsewhere, people are restless, worried, hurried about, anxious respecting one thing, anxious respecting another. Nothing of the kind here, sir. We have done all that-we know the worst of it; we have got to the bottom, we can't fall, and what have we found? Peace" (p. 103). That debtor is Dorrit, already relieved by his quiet refuge and destined, as the turnkey pro- phesies, to become Father of the Marshalsea. As Father, Dorrit disowns paternity and purpose and abdicates authentic authority; he appears to be as absent and as dead a father as Clennam's. Although Dickens scorns Dorrit's refusal to be responsible for his actions, the secure sta- bility of the "place of refuge" nonetheless at- tracts Dickens and represents the drive in the novel toward becoming "nobody." The pastoral interludes in the novel embody this longing for rest, stasis, and death: the Meagleses' little home and its river, which Clennam would like to float down; the Plornishes' parodic "Happy Cottage"; the turnkey's and Amy's imaginary fields out- side the prison walls; Maggie's dreams of the hospital, with its appropriately oral gratifications, especially "chicking"; Amy's tale of the princess spinning in her cottage. Despite the differences among these pastoral scenes and imaginings, all appear metaphorically related to the prison's freedom from conflict.
13	Dorrit's acceptance of this otherwise unacknowledged narrative desire earns him Dickens' conscious scorn, which is affirmed by the reader's disrespect; yet Dorrit's passivity also surreptitiously reveals Dickens' sympathy for the father, forever incarcerated in his imagi- nation. Hidden within Little Dorrit's assault on the Victorian paterfamilias, then, are Dickens' deeply buried guilt, his complex contradictions, and his fears about fathering. Much has been written about Dickens' ambivalent relationship to his own father, John Dickens, portrayed as the im- provident yet good-humored Micawber and the tyrannical usurper Murdstone in David Copper- field. Much has also been written about Dickens' hopes for his sons when he became a father, the good provider whose father became his depen- dent (financially and psychologically), a "son" among his own failing, unsuccessful sons.12 In Little Dorrit the autobiographical urge seems less clear than it is in Copperfield, but the represen- tation of fathering appears no less confessional because more fictional." Guilt over the lack of a nameable origin and anger over the absence of paternal support and discipline balance the belief that one doesn't deserve a fatherly mentor, a family, a lineage, a constitutive name. Outside and prior to the narrative is its originating yet untold act: the father's adultery-his faithless sexuality, his false engendering, his duplicitous authority. Being a father means creating bas- tardy, becoming deceptively tyrannical, and necessarily failing to provide for offspring. The narrative displaces and then replaces the father, as the son attempts, and fails, to shortcut geneal- ogy and become his own engenderer. The father, like the son, is indeed "nobody." Little Dorrit, however, also tells the story of a daughter, Little Dorrit.
14	Amy performs the functions Dickens himself performed while his family lived in prison; the youngest child, and a daughter at that, takes "the place of the eldest of the three," and "in all things but precedence" becomes the "head of the fallen family" and bears its "anxieties and shames" (pp. 111-12). Amy serves her father in a perfect union of love and duty. She does not think of herself or "trouble any one with her emotions" (p. 139); she sacrifices her life for others; she submits absolutely to her father's authority although he is clearly unworthy of her submission. Amy habitually sits silently by her father's side or falls piteously "at her father's feet" (p. 421 ) or "obey[s] without a murmur, . . . little patient hands folded before her" (p. 517) in her char- acteristic pose of deference to, and respect for, authority. 1 The figure for Amy's willful, almost grotesque 239 Storytelling and the Figure of the Father in Little Dorrit submission, for her ability to nurture in depriva- tion, is breast feeding: "There was a classical daughter once-perhaps-who ministered to her father in his prison as her mother had ministered to her. Little Dorrit, though of the unheroic modern stock and mere English, did much more, in comforting her father's wasted heart upon her innocent breast, and turning to it a fountain of love and fidelity that never ran dry or waned through all his years of famine" (pp. 273-74). The almost shocking collapse of the metaphor into the literal betrays this passage's contradic- tions: despite Amy's metaphorical and daughterly "self-sacrifice" (Dickens' running title for this page), the motherly act of breast feeding upsets the generations, makes the father dependent, and sexualizes the father-daughter relationship. Al- though Dickens attempts to distance these as- sociations with the analogy to Euphrasia and her father, the King of Syracuse, the figure stands for the double horror of incest. If the story of a son relates the search for a father's authority, the story of a daughter tells of incestuous structures of desire.
15	Freud discusses incest as fantasy and desire, the sexual aspects of a nurturing relationship. These aspects represent the personal horror of incest, and its structures of desire appear widely in our literature. The cultural horror of incest, however, relates to genealogy, to the "swallow- ing up' by the family of other social institutions and commitments. Society collapses onto the family as the family becomes the voracious de- vourer of wider human connection. '1 Little Dor- rit's version of incest represents this double bond of incest-familial desire and the temporal col- lapse of generation. The narrative collapses the family onto two figures: the daughter whom the father seduces becomes the mother who nurtures him, while the fatherly figure of the law be- comes, through regression, the son. This dyad combines all the roles possible in an incest matrix: father, daughter, mother, and son. Self- sufficiency, nurturing, satisfaction of all need and desire, temporal regression, and narcissism make this matrix a figure for the Dickensian family; it is a representation of bliss, the assuaging secret that attempts to atone for patriarchal authority and guilt in the narrative. We begin with familial desire. Amy Dorrit nurses her father, ministers to him, thinks of living always with him, and occasionally sleeps in the same bed with him. William Dorrit, how- ever, upsets this father-daughter idyll when he thinks of replacing Amy with the prunes-and- prism Mrs. General. After this sexual betrayal of the daughter, the father-as-lover finds himself displaced by his brother, his double, Frederick Dorrit: As he stopped here, looking in unseen, he felt a pang. Surely not like jealousy? For why like jeal- ousy? There was only his daughter and his brother there: he, with his chair drawn to the hearth, en- joying the warmth of the evening wood fire; she seated at a little table, busied with some embroidery work. Allowing for the great difference in the still- life of the picture, the figures were much the same as of old; his brother being sufficiently like himself to represent himself, for a moment, in the composi- tion.
16	So had he sat many a night, over a coal fire far away; so had she sat, devoted to him. Yet surely there was nothing to be jealous of in the old miser- able poverty. Whence, then, the pang in his heart? (p. 699) While the earlier incestuous scene was evaded by historical metaphor, this one is distanced by pictorial representation: the past made still life in the present. Yet the jealousy at replacement is clear, as is the familiar, comfortable, silent, habitual intimacy Dorrit voyeuristically views. This replacement drives Dorrit mad and kills him: although Dickens hints at Dorrit's impend- ing breakdown and overtly blames the Marshalsea for his madness, William Dorrit dies because a different father-lover sits with Amy. William breaks in on the idyllic scene, calls Frederick (his double) mad, then goes mad himself; Fred- erick, inordinately guilty over his brother's death, dies the same night at his brother's bedside. The father, then, becomes lover, and the uncle replaces him. In a final narrative replacement in this series of fathers and daughter, the lover be- comes father. Throughout the novel, Clennam plays father to Little Dorrit, while she plays his child. '1 "'Don't mind me," he tells her, "who, for the matter of years, might be your father or your uncle. Always think of me as quite an old man" (p. 434). Amy writes Clennam from Italy: What I have to pray and entreat of you is . . . that you will remember me only as the little shabby girl 240 Dianne F. Sadoff you protected with so much tenderness, from whose threadbare dress you have kept away the rain, and whose wet feet you have dried at your fire. That you will think of me . . . and of my true affection and devoted gratitude, always without change, as of your poor child, LITTLE DORRIT. (p. 524) At the center of the novel, a crucial "rec- ognition"-knowing-and-revelation-scene an- nounces the identity of lover and father.
17	Clennam tells Amy that her family will be free of prison and rich as well, through inheritance; "as he kissed her, she turned her head towards his shoulder, and raised her arm towards his neck; cried out 'Father! Father! Father!' and swooned away" (p. 465). This remarkable naming of the lover "father" becomes accurate later when Clen- nam, having got into debt like William Dorrit, committed a "crime" to justify his pervasive sense of guilt, advertises himself as scapegoat and goes to prison-in a metaphoric sense, for all speculators. Clennam chooses to be incar- cerated in the Marshalsea and winds up in the room the Father of the Marshalsea once in- habited; he dreams of Little Dorrit, and she sud- clenly appears, his 'own poor child come back!" Amy performs for Clennam the loving tasks she once performed there for her fattier: she sits by his side, her "nimble fingers busy at their old work"; she "never movels] from his side, except to wait upon him"; she sits by his bed at night "tending" him. In response, Clennam takes her "in his arms, as if she had been his daughter." Just as she nursed her father in that room, she "nuirses and restores" Clennam: "Drawing an arm softly round his neck, [she] laid his head upon her bosom, put a hand upon his head, and resting her cheek upon that hand, nursed him as lovingly, and GOD knows as innocently, as she had nursed her father in that room when she had been but a baby" (pp. 825-29). The structural similarity of Clennam's and Dorrit's actions, the figural repetition of breast feeding, allows Clennam finally to replace the father, but in a scene different from the one he had envisioned. The father-daughter idyll creates a snug little space of peace and stasis, nurturing activities from both partners, intimate work and caring, unspoken affection and communication, both familial and sexual.
18	Whether in the prison or at the hearth, this father-daughter idyll repre- sents the same sweet death Clennam dreamed of by the Meagleses' river, the same peace Dorrit found in prison, the same deceptive snugness of the Plornishes' "Happy Cottage." Father-daugh- ter incest represents a choice of willful sub- mission, of temporal regression, of bourgeois isolation and privacy; it privileges values ap- parently scorned in the narrative search for originating paternity. Replacing the father, then, means bearing a burden of contradictory forces, love and death. Both lead, however, to the void that creates "nobody." Metaphorical father-daughter incest in Little Dorrit ends in marriage, as the narrative attempts to atone for the unnarrated adultery that is the novel's absent origin. The father does not, how- ever, simply marry the daughter. This central fantasy of marriage occurs, as we have seen, through displacement of relationship and motive, through doubling and disguise, through splitting and twinning of character, through metaphor.17 William Dorrit, for example, projects his moti- vations onto his double and brother, Frederick, who displaces him in Amy's affections; Jeremiah Flintwinch's twin brother takes on half the ac- tions of the "stolen will" plot; Clennam displaces his useless love for Pet Meagles onto her dead twin, Lillie; the apparently motiveless Rigaud, alias Blandois, alias Langier, acts out Clennam's hidden motives: Miss Wade mirrors Tattycoram, her self made ripe and rotten. The metaphorical marriage of father and daughter at the novel's conclusion both reveals and attempts to heal the narrative's splits, doubles, and twins. This metaphorical marriage links not only father and daughter but other family members as well and so creates the genealogically repeti- tive horrors of incest. The hidden will, Uncle Gilbert's codicil, reveals and mediates these sub- stitutions. When the plotless plot unwinds itself, the mistress of Arthur Clennam's father, not Mrs. Clennam, is Arthur's mother.
19	The stolen codicil indicates that Mr. Ciennam's mistress' patron's youngest daughter---or niece, if there is no daughter-shall receive recompense for Mrs. Clennam's crime against the mistress, the re- moval of the mistress' child, Arthur. The patron's youngest niece is Amy. The provisions of the will make no motivational, logical, or legal sense. No relation by blood links the Dorrits to the Clennams, and the lines of descent are absurdly 241 Storytelling and the Figure of the Father in Little Dorrit torturous-as is the reader's job of unwinding them. Yet the two families are motivational and genealogical mirror images. The Clennam family consists primarily of real orphans; the Dorrit family, of metaphorical ones. The Dorrits be- come a metaphor for Clennam repression, trans- gression, and punishment. The orphaned mistress links the two genealogies structurally, although she is related by blood to neither: she meets Arthur's orphaned father in Frederick Dorrit's dancing studio, and they later commit adultery. Thus Gilbert Clennam's codicil signifies that an uncle atones for a near-niece's sexual sin and punishment by leaving money to another uncle's niece. By virtue of uncle and niece, Little Dorrit resembles the orphaned mistress. She appears to be Arthur Clennam's metaphorical mother, both by analogy to the Clennam family tree and be- cause his revealed parentage makes him lack a mother. Clennam and Amy are metaphorical son and mother, just as they are father and daughter. Amy and Clennam also become metaphorical sister and brother through several narrative de- vices that collapse generation and family desire onto their marriage. Genealogically, the Clennam family in the novel consists of three generations, whose important members are (great-) uncle- father-son. In the Dorrit version of the same structure, Frederick, the uncle, is a brother to the father: uncle-father, by way of brotherhood, collapses the three male generations into two.
20	William Dorrit, who is unable to play the role of father to his children, resembles the absent father of the Clennam family. What appears a difference in generational structure is also a similarity: (great-) uncle-(absent) father-son on one family tree, uncle-(metaphorically absent) father-daughter on the other. This genealogical symmetry of uncles and absent fathers makes Arthur Clennam and Amy Dorrit metaphorical sister and brother. Like Florence Dombey and Walter Gay, like David Copperfield and Agnes Wickfield, like Pip and Estella, they marry.ls This substitution of brother and sister for father and daughter also appears in an embedded narrative. When Mr. Dorrit asks Amy to tolerate John Chivery's advances, he tells a metaphorical story, about an ex-collegian and turnkey, that replaces him, as father, with "brother" and Amy, as daughter, with "sister": that brother (who is literally but not narratively a father) wants his sister (who is literally but not narratively a daughter) to coquet with the turnkey in return for prison favors and patronage (p. 271). Dor- rit's narrative, like Dickens', generates a con- fusion that attempts to disguise similarity of situation by reference to difference, all the while admitting similarity and substitution and so creating guilt. Through complex denouement and disguised plotting, then, Dickens achieves in Lit- tle Dorrit the fantasied marriage of father and daughter, son and mother, brother and sister, all in the persons of Arthur Clennam and Amy Dorrit. This metaphorical reunion of a family origi- nally split by adultery and illegitimacy is an effort to heal the wound of sexual guilt. Clennam thinks, "If my father had erred, it was my first duty to conceal the fault and to repair it" (p. 787). The narrative conceals the fault through detoured plot and deferred inheritance and also repairs or redeems the fault through incest. The incest proves so metaphorically thorough, so exaggerated a cure that no other relationships can be imagined, no adultery conceived. Amy and Clennam's marriage appears the perfect nar- cissistic paradise.
21	The entire family genealogy (the space and time of engendering identity and difference) and the entire oedipal triangle (the structure of desire) collapse on this bride and groom. Mrs. Clennam's house collapses on it- self, in the perfect metaphor for such incestuous desire. All other Clennams and Dorrits are now dead (except for Fanny and Tip, who don't count in the linking of Clennams and Dorrits by codicil and who have, through greed and vanity, lost their portions of the inheritance anyway). Clennam and Amy become orphans together, as well as father-daughter, son-mother, brother- sister. They are family and no family, victims and survivors. Their metaphorical incest pro- vides a paradoxical protection against life among the eager, the arrogant, the froward, and the vain. Does this conclusion, however, undo Dickens' double narrative of a son and a daughter? Let us reconsider some deferred relationships be- tween oedipal structures and storytelling. Roland 242 Dianne F. Sadoff Barthes, in the passage I quoted earlier, states that "the pleasure of the text is not the pleasure of the corporeal striptease or of narrative sus- pense," which is an "Oedipal pleasure." The pleasure of reading, as Barthes's own text indi- cates in its radical structuring of our reading, inheres in the gaps of texts, in the discontinuities of language and narrative. As Barthes's alpha- betically arranged fragments demonstrate, textual order is arbitrary yet inevitably linear. The Pleasure of the Text discusses and embodies the play of these textual oppositions, the pleasurable paradox of sequence and discontinuity in lan- guage and its structures. The "Oedipal pleasure," then, of narrative closure and knowledge that Barthes associates with tracking down the father must, by analogy with Barthes's own demystifi- cation of narrative form, appear equivocal at best.
22	Oedipus himself never fully confirms his paternity but assumes it as known because it is prophesied and retold to him by others.1"' If narrative structure metaphorically attempts to confirm paternity, confer authority, and so know end and origin, it also demonstrates that the narrative search for the father and for full knowl- edge of the son's replacing that father can never be achieved. Limited human perception of the "truth," perhaps itself a metaphor, protects against the roar on the other side of silence. Fredric V. Bogel argues, in fact, that Dickens' melodramatic narrative discoveries (he offers as example Pip's discovery of his real benefactor) derive their intensity from the "striking failures of human knowledge," that patterns of knowl- edge in Dickens' novels "depend on human error and blindness.""' Little Dorrit more than bears out Bogel's assertions: at the end of the novel, Arthur Clennam's metaphorical blindness repeats and resembles Oedipus' literal, yet dramatically metaphorical and ironic, blindness. The narra- tive's frequent gaps in motivation, its doubles, its rhetorical evasions, its pointless plot culmi- nate in the novel's problematic, overdetermined, yet unfulfilled ending. '1 The novel's final revelation, then, of its com- plex incestuous and father-seeking structure is also no revelation. Although Arthur Clennam suspects his father has "erred," Dickens keeps Clennam conspicuously absent from the denoue- ment scene; and so Rigaud, Clennam's dark double, learns the secret about Clennam's pa- ternity and birth that Clennam will never-in this narrative-know. The child-woman whom Clennam marries knows his secret, but she has equivocally promised to protect him from knowl- edge of it. In replacing the father, Clennam finds not the purpose and authority he'd hoped for but the lack of it; he finds the incestuous idyll of peace and stasis. Clennam can never know the truth of his oedipal vocation, never engender the self, transform paternity, and end doubleness.
23	The narrative revelation that originating fathers are corrupt, debased, and inauthentic must be hidden from the narrative's purposeless hero (a paradoxical repetition of his own father) be- cause Oedipus' recognition of sonhood, however fictional, generates tragedy. If the son fails in Little Dorrit to find an authentic vocation and so to replace and acquire knowledge of the father, if the narrative evades full disclosure of paternal secrets, what of the author who attempts to father himself by en- gendering narrative? Arthur Clennam's search for something stable to cure aimlessness, like David Copperfield's, Richard Carstone's, Sydney Carton's, Pip Pirrip's, and Eugene Wrayburn's, originates in the lack of paternal metaphor. The struggles of these aimless young and not-so- young heroes appear a metaphor for the struggle of the restless Charles Dickens. The later novels, then, disclose and disguise this narrative proj- ect: the attempt to write the paternal metaphor, the resemblance between father and son; to discover the failure of metaphor; and so to be- come one's own father, to create oneself. Clen- nam's narrative search stands in metaphorical relation to Dickens'. The purpose of this nar- rative for the writer, as for his hero, is to con- front the guilt of the father. Yet Dickens the writer represses structural and narrative knowl- edge of the father. Metaphor begets its opposite, its double, catachresis. Narrative sequence, pa- ternal origin as aim and endpoint, becomes attenuated. Full disclosure appears deferred be- yond the limits of narrative. Just as Arthur Clen- nam's will-less father broke out of his religious repression to engender the events of this narra- tive, however, so Dickens' found fatherhood threatens to break through his repression of it and return to engender more narrative. As Pip's 243 Storytelling and the Figure of the Father in Little Dorrit excoriating self-critique will demonstrate, the story of a father must be repeated-like this, yet differently.
24	Antioch College Yellow Springs, Ohio Notes 1 The first quotation is from Charles Dickens, Great Expectations (London: Oxford Univ. Press, 1953), p. 303. The second is from Dickens, Letter to John Forster, 9 Sept. 1839, in The Letters of Charles Dickens, ed. Madeline House and Graham Storey, I (Oxford: Clarendon, 1965), 581. Hereafter cited as the Pilgrim Letters. 2 I am indebted in this discussion of the relationship among plots in the multiple-plotted novel to J. Hillis Miller's talks in a National Endowment for the Hu- manities summer seminar held at Yale University in 1977. : Peter K. Garrett, "Double Plots and Dialogical Form in Victorian Fiction," Nineteenth-Centurv Fic- tion, 32 (1977), 1-17, also makes this observation about Bleak House in his application of Mikhail Bakh- tin's terminology to multiple-plotted Victorian novels. 4 For a longer discussion of genealogy and narrative structure, see Patricia Drechsel Tobin, Time and the Novel: The Genealogical Imperative (Princeton: Prince- ton Univ. Press, 1978). Applying Edward Said's struc- tural-anth ropological terminology to narrative structure, temporality, and genealogy, Tobin chronicles the break- down of such narrative assumptions in the modern and postmodern novel. She believes that, aside from a few quirky exceptions, Victorian fiction fails to interrogate its own genealogical structures and ideologies: my essay fundamentally disagrees with Tobin's assumptions about Victorian narrative. Eliot, Middlemnarich, ed. Gordon S. Haight (Boston: Houghton, 1956), p. 607. r> Barthes, The Pleasure of the Text, trans. Richard Miller (New York: Hill and Wang, 1975), pp. 10. 47. Barthes's paradigm, of course, valorizes masculine aesthetics: his perspective of the son-as-writer is the one from which I view Dickens here. David Copperfield (New York: Random. 1950), p. xv. s Dickens, Little Dorrit, ed. John Holloway (Balti- more: Penguin, 1976), p. 59.
25	All page references in the text of the essay are to this edition. :' Albert D. Hutter. "Reconstructive Autobiography: The Experience at Warren's Blacking," Dickens Studies A (nnual, 6 (1977), 1-14, believes the reason the black- ing warehouse factory scarred Dickens so deeply was just this childish fantasy of replacing the father and the seeming confirmation of the fantasied replacement when his family lived in prison while Dickens worked and lived outside. In Little Dorrit, of course, Dickens re- creates this "scene" from his experience by making himself female and submissive, turning violent emotions toward the self. 10 Welsh, The City of Dickens (Oxford: Clarendon, 1971), pp. 134-35. 11 Paul D. Herring, "Dickens's Monthly Number Plans for Little Dor-it," Modern Philology, 64 (1966). 38. 12 See, in addition to Hutter, "Reconstructive Auto- biography," Leonard Manheim, "The Law as Father: An Aspect of the Dickens Pattern," American Imago, 12 (1955), 17-23, and "The Personal History of David Copperfield," Amereicanlt Imago, 9 (1952), 21-43 (rpt. in The Practice of Psychoanalvtic Criticism, ed. Leonard Tennenhouse [Detroit: Wayne State Univ. Press, 1976], pp. 75-94); Steven Marcus. "Who Is Fagin?" in Dickens: From Pickwick to Dombey (New York: Simon. 1968), pp. 358-78; Albert D. Hutter, "Crime and Fantasy in Great Expectations," in Psychoanalysis and Literary Process, ed. Frederick Crews (Cambridge, Mass. : Winthrop, 1970), pp. 25-65: Pearl Chesler Solomon, Dickens and Melville in Their Tim2e (New York: Columbia Univ. Press, 1975); Lawrence Jay Dessner, "Great Expectations: 'the ghost of a man's own father,' " PMLA, 91 (1976). 436-49; Branwen Bailey Pratt, "Dickens and Father: Notes on the Family Romance."
26	Hartford Studies in Literature, 8 (1976), 4-22. Ran- dolph Splitter, "Guilt and the Trappings of Melodrama in Little Dor-it," Dickens Studies Ainnual, 6 (1977), 119-33. mentions the father with regard to Clennam's guilt but blames primarily the mother for the hero's guilt and self-repression. Welsh, however, says, "Tn Little Dorrit the supplanting of the father is thorough" (p. 153): William Myers. "The Radicalism of Little Dorrit," in Literature and Politics in the Nine- teenth! Century,! ed. John Lucas (London: Methuen, 1971). claims that "the middle-class paterfaniilias penetrates the novel at every level" (p. 80). 1: See Barry Westburg, The Confessional Fictions of Charles Dickens (Urbana: Northern Illinois Univ. Press, 1977), for a definition of the difference between autobiography and confessional fiction. 14J. Hillis Miller, Charles Dickens: The Worlt of His Novels (Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press, 1958), believes Little Do-rit's "voluntary refusal to will" makes her a "human incarnation of divine goodness" (p. 246). This providential view of Amy and of the novel in general, a view with which I strongly disagree, is also articulated by Avrom Fleishman. "Master and Servant in Little Dor-it." Stludies in English Literature, 14 (1974), 575-86. and Jerome Beaty, "The 'Soothing Songs' of Little Dol-it." in Nineteenih-Centurv Literary Perspectives: E.says in Hotlor of Lionel Stevenson, ed. Clyde deL. Ryals (Durham, N.C.: Duke Univ. Press, 1974), pp. 219-36. In contrast, Janice M. Carlisle, 244 Dianne F. Sadoff "Little Dorrit: Necessary Fictions," Studies in the Novel, 7 (1975), 195-214, presents Amy as a figure of prac- tical deception and fictionalizing.
27	15 For an extended discussion of Freud's evasions of culture in his early theories of the Oedipus complex, see Paul Ricoeur, Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation, trans. Denis Savage (New Haven: Yale Univ. Press, 1970), pp. 194-211. 16 Welsh, pp. 153-54 and 172-73, also discusses the relationship between father and lover in Little Dorrit, and my discussion of this issue is indebted to his. 17 Albert D. Hutter applies Freud's mechanism, splitting of the ego, to Dickens' narrative technique in "Nation and Generation in A Tale of Two Cities," PMLA, 93 (1978), 448--62; "'The High Tower of His Mind': Psychoanalysis and the Reader of Bleak House," Criticism, 19 (1977), 296-316; and other articles. See also Elaine Showalter, "Guilt, Authority, and the Shadows of Little Dorrit," Nineteenth-Century Fiction, 34 (1979), 20-40. 18 See Jacques Lacan's analysis of Judge Schreber's case as resulting from lack of paternal metaphor, "On a Question Preliminary to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis," in Ecrits: A Selection, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: Norton, 1977), pp. 179-225. 19 For an examination of Oedipus' guilt from the perspective of Rene Girard's theories of scapegoating, see Sandor Goodheart, "Oedipus and Laius' Many Murderers," Diacritics, 8 (1978), 55-71. See also Girard, Violence and the Sacred, trans. Patrick Gregory (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 1977), Chs. vii and viii, and Cynthia Chase, "Oedipal Textuality: Reading Freud's Reading of Oedipus," Diacritics, 9 (1979), 54-68. 20 Bogel, "Fables of Knowing: Melodrama and Re- lated Forms," Genre, 11 (1978), 97-98.
28	21 See J. Hillis Miller's short meditation on the metaphor of knots and narrative closure, "The Problem- atic of Ending in Narrative," Nineteenth-Century Fiction, 33 (1978), 3-7. See also Alistair M. Duck- worth's attempt to wed deconstructive criticism to hu- manism, "Little Dorrit and the Question of Closure," Nineteenth-Century Fiction, 33 (1978), 110-30. Duck- worth's article fails to confront its ambivalent response to its theoretical material; its Derridean terms are in quotes throughout the text and so become attenuated and tentative: "This essay has attempted both to attest to the power of Derrida's deconstructive mode and to restate the merits of a thematic criticism that is willing to become, to an extent, 'grammatological'" (p. 130). 245
