0	Reviews 455 perfumed this one, bursting with flesh!' (p. I66). Even in the translations of the letters elementary blunders occur: 'Voici deux ans que j'ai commis le peche . ..': 'I have for two years committed the sin .. .' (p. 70); 'Et mon Vers, il me fait mal par instants': 'And my verse, it makes me ill at times' (p. 66); 'Ici-bas a une odeur de cuisine': 'here below there's a smell of cooking' (p. 97); 'Ici-bas est maitre': 'Here below is in control' (ib.). When Mallarme describes to Cazalis how he would return from teaching in school 'avec des papiers au derriere et des bonshommes sur mon manteau', this becomes: 'with papers behind and simpletons at my coattail' (p. 66). The translators' incompetence is also revealed in bibliographical matters. When, for example, M. Mauron refers to the exegetical work of Mme Noulet, they list (p. 256) only her Eltudes litteraires (Mexico, I944) and omit her major work L'(Euvre poetique de Stephane Mallarme (Paris, I940) and her useful Dix poemes de Mallarme (Lille, I948). One may well wonder how so scandalously inferior a translation could be subsidized by one university and published by another. L. J. AUSTIN CAMBRIDGE L'analyse de 1'esprit dans les Cahiers de Valery. By JUDITH ROBINSON. Paris: Corti. I963. 222 pp. I5 N.F. The part of his writing which Valery most enjoyed and to which he really gave of himself were the break-of-day meditations pursued for over fifty years and now known to us as Les Cahiers. Tout ce que j'ai crit d'important, je ne l'ai pas publie . .
1	J'ai tenu pendant toute ma vie des cahiers de notes, qui sont l'histoire de mon esprit... Peut-etre ces cahiers paraitront-ils, posthumes ... II y a des milliers de pages.1 And so there are, twenty-nine tomes of a good nine hundred pages each. Mrs Robinson's book, the first to appear on that fascinating compendium as a whole, accordingly represents in itself a digestive process, a patient study of manuscript, of no mean order. If the Cahiers themselves have added a new and vital dimension to our knowledge of Valery in providing his 'pensee principale' as distinct from the 'pensee accessoire' to quote the terms he used in Cahier IX 526, Mrs Robinson has brought to this wealth of material a comprehension of im- pressive breadth. As foreshadowed in her illuminating articles published in this journal in October 1960 and October I961, Mrs Robinson places Valery the thinker in the perspective of twentieth-century scientific preoccupations. With her references to neurophysiology, thermodynamics, relativity, modern physics and analytical philosophy, her book bears witness to very wide scientific/philo- sophical reading, sustained by lively interest. Claims such as the following reflect the excitement of her explorations: Ce qu'il y a de vraiment remarquable, c'est que les cybern6ticiens ont utilis6 dans leurs travaux les plus recents toutes les branches des math6matiques que Val6ry avait propos6es des le d6but du siecle comme instruments d'analyse de l'esprit. (p. 75) Information obtained by investigating what Valery read, by consulting his private library - almost undisturbed since his death - and by noting which books were obviously much used, is invaluable when it comes to discussing the extent of Valery's scientific knowledge.
2	Mrs Robinson's conclusions have the further support of allusions in the Cahiers to conversations with physicists such as Perrin, 1 Valery to Leon Pierre-Quint, quoted by Dr E. von Richthofen L'esprit createur, Spring 1964, p. 28. Langevin and Louis and Maurice de Broglie and with mathematicians of the standing of Emile Borel and Jacques Hadamard. But Mrs Robinson is not dazzled by her subject. She criticizes Valery's over- facile rejection of the emotions, the lack of compassion in his ethics, his disparage- ment of moral sensitivity in man. There is a very useful index, but understandably no bibliography since only occasional references are made to Valery's other work. In years to come, the search-lights of criticism will certainly be brought to bear on the Cahiers from a variety of angles, but no theme could be more central than this for one whose focal interest was the human mind and its functioning. This first study is on all counts an important book.. . DANIEL V. J. DANIEL OXFORD Elysian Encounter: Diderot and Gide. By G. NORMAN LAIDLAW. New York: Syracuse University Press. 1963. ix+25I pp. $5.50. Various writers have made passing reference to affinities between Diderot and Gide. None seems to have considered such affinities as more than fortuitous. Professor Laidlaw's book is the result of a search for evidence of an 'extraordinary relationship' between the two. 'Blessed with (or plagued by) an associative mind', he unearths a considerable number of parallels, in their general habits of thought, their ethical preoccupations, their attitudes to religion and death. Two interesting chapters are devoted to their use of 'folly' and 'blindness' as themes. No consideration is given of their respective attitudes to fiction and the nature of fiction - a curious omission, since they are responsible for perhaps the two outstanding 'experimental' novels in the language. Curious, too, is a certain amount of the incidental critical comment: are Diderot and Gide really 'men of resolute thought and plain speech' (p. i) ?
3	Are they 'two of the most ... imaginative authors of modern literature' (p. 196)? To say that both are 'moral men ethically since they prefer virtue to vice' (p. 122) is surely to miss an important distinction. For Gide shared Goethe's acceptance of the need of vice - indeed he had a marked taste for it; the 'higher immorality' he intuited as a synthesis beyond the dichotomy of conventional good and evil. There is none of this vital dialectic in Diderot; hence his perpetual dilemma, his contradictions, his 'ambiguity'. Nowhere does Professor Laidlaw make us aware that between Diderot and Gide the nineteenth century has intervened, and that Gide has absorbed into himself a large measure of the thought and feeling of a total literary revolution. There is little here to indicate that similarities of attitude, interest, and thought might disguise the fact that the sensibilities of both writers were fundamentally at variance. And though Professor Laidlaw, in a final chapter, stretches rather misleadingly the available evidence of contact, the fact remains that Gide paid little attention to Diderot. During his creative years, he was above all the 'artist'. He ignored Diderot then because Diderot was not, primarily, an artist; just as he largely ignored Diderot's age as 'artistically' barren - for it would be quite wrong to say, with Professor Laidlaw (p. I84), that Gide preferred the eighteenth century to any other. And later, with all art spent, as in his declining years he meditated on death, he found no sustenance in Diderot's example or in his eschatological thought. Ultimately, though the affinities documented here are occasionally thought- provoking, the work neither adds to our knowledge of Diderot or Gide (about whom various errors of fact are made), nor does it really deepen the knowledge we already have of either. The Elysian viewpoint that abstracts both writers from their times and very largely from their own developments makes for undue simplifications and identifications. The 'associative' needs to be complemented by the 'dissociative' 456 Reviews
