0	CHARLES G. WHITING Sexual Imagery in La Jeune Parque and Charmes T HERE CAN BE little doubt about the im- portance of sexuality in Valery's poetry since it is fundamental to his greatest poem, La Jeune Parque.' As the poem begins, a distraught virgin questions herself beneath a night sky by the edge of the sea. What pain awakens her? What crime, by herself or against herself? This suffering comes from a dream she had of a Serpent's bite, and the Serpent is evoked in sexual images, sinuous, undulating, impatient, yet heavily lan- guorous. The sexual dream and self-questioning of the Parque seem inspired by the sexual dream and uncertainty at the beginning of Mallarme's "L'Apres-Midi d'un faune." Valery has acknowl- edged his debt to Mallarme.2 But the dream of possessing two nymphs-one chaste, one all sighs -symbolizes grasping an ideal unity for the di- vided Faun, half deity, half animal. The poet is dreaming of carrying off an artistic and, at the same time, a sexual triumph, and the Faun's uncer- tainty concerns the real or fictitious character of the vision. Mallarme has reworked themes of Baudelaire's "paradis perdu" poetry, as in "L'In- vitation au voyage," where a dreamland is the place of artistic and amorous success and also of ideal moral unity, instead of the duality of spleen et ideal. Valery's approach, however, is radically different. If the dream in Baudelaire and Mallarme represents unity, in Valery it creates disunity, re- vealing to the Parque her divided being. And whereas Mallarme's representations of duality in "L'Apres-Midi d'un faune" remain allegorical and intellectual, Valery's entire poem is an ex- ploration of the psychological and physiological repercussions of a conflict between the ambitions of the intellect and the mysteries and exigencies of the body.
1	If the intellect finally yields, it is not be- cause of punished hubris (as in Mallarme's poem where failure comes from overreaching), but be- cause the demands of the body, symbolized by the dream of the Serpent in the opening lines, cannot be denied. In view of Valery's attitude and the 1917 publi- cation date of La Jeune Parque, one might be tempted to believe that Freudian influences ex- plain the separation between Mallarme and Valery. At Vienna, between 1915 and 1917, Freud lec- tured on the sexual symbolism of dreams and in his tenth lecture referred specifically to the serpent as a sexual symbol. But Valery, although a great student of dreams, was determinedly anti-Freud- ian. "Je suis le moins Freudien des hommes et it m' arrive de douter des reves. "3 Valery, as Judith Robinson has conclusively demonstrated, was much more interested by the form of dreams than by their content.4 Through the study of dreams, he hoped to elucidate consciousness in general, because he was convinced that dreams and the waking state were merely different phases of the mind. Their difference lay not in their composing elements but in the way these elements were co- ordinated. Still it would be wrong to think that Valery simply rejected anything irrational.5 "La Pythie" shows very clearly the importance of the irrational in the creation of poetry. And the Par- que herself says: "Mais je tremblais de perdre une douleur divine! / Je baisais sur ma main cette morsure fine" (11. 97-98). But the primary role is given to the alert and rational intellect. Far from remaining attached to the dream, the Parque brusquely dismisses the Serpent and prefers the illuminations of the conscious intelligence and will :6 Va! je n'ai plus besoin de ta race naive, Cher Serpent ... Je m'enlace, etre vertigineux! (11.
2	50-51) Tu regardais dormir ma belle negligence ... Mais avec mes perils, je suis d'intelligence, Plus versatile, 6 Thyrse, et plus perfide qu'eux. (11. 81-83) Sexuality is rejected here, but it returns even more powerfully in a following long and beautiful passage where the Parque recalls her innocent adolescence when she wandered joyous and care- free beneath the sun. This moment of innocence, 940 Charles Whiting 941 however, was also one of intense, although un- conscious, nascent sexuality. What is more, here and in successive passages, the young virgin is shown moving progressively and unknowingly into a trap.7 Valery is again reworking according to his own perspectives a theme of nineteenth- century poetry: nostalgia for childhood innocence. Elements which appear in "L'Apres-Midi d'un faune" and "Herodiade" recur in La Jeune Parque but are transformed by the intensity of Valery's physiological awareness. The Parque is even more a part of nature than the Faun, a velvet fruit enveloped, ripened, and finally devoured by the sun. In a later passage, there is a similarly direct and powerful sexual response to the rising saps and bursting leaves of springtime. But if, in MallarmE's poem, the sensual heat of noon weighs heavily on the woods and marshes and finally plunges a languid Faun again into sleep, no such thing occurs in La Jeune Parque. The Parque, walking under a brilliant but not oppres- sive sun, at no time succumbs to lassitude. On the contrary, after imagery evoking sexual union with the sun, it is the sun and not the Parque who yields to weariness, and the Parque's happiness is mani- fested by her quick and alert strides through the banks of flowers. If in a later passage where she recalls an evening woodland scene there is a near- yielding to sexual languor ("Mon ccur fut-il si pres d'un ccur qui va faiblir?" 1. 203), all the emphasis in the retelling of this episode is on the rejection of weakness.
3	This is characteristic of all sexual passages where the poet himself is present or where his presence is symbolized. "Fragments du Narcisse" contains a celebrated passage of sexual weariness, but it is again the setting sun which yields voluptuously, and not the sensual Narcissus who throughout the poem is vigorous and forceful. In "La Dormeuse," it is the naked, sleeping mistress who is seized by "langueur longue," and not the poet, who wonders about her dreams and gazes at her body. And finally, most convincing of all is "La Fausse Morte," which recounts a sexual "death," a coming back to life, and then a new "death." Valery still manages to end the poem on an indubitable note of vivac- ity. The significance of this attitude in Valery is clear. It is perhaps more surprising to discover that intellectualized eroticism is absent from the sexual passages in La Jeune Parque and Charmes. It is here that we can again measure the distance separating Valery from Mallarme. "L'Apres-Midi d'un faune" is strongly erotic: the Faun derives his pleasure from imaginings, from the idea of un- dressing the nymphs, from spying on them, from their frightened resistance and struggle, and finally from the thought that he is arousing the first sexual desires in innocent virgins. Valery, on the other hand, is not at all interested by the erotic possibil- ities in the sexual awakening of the Parque. Some of the explanation for this profound difference be- tween the two poets lies no doubt in their differing attitudes toward matter, that matter for which Mallarme felt only distaste, but which so at- tracted Valery: "eau, roche, pulpe des feuilles, le sable tres fin, la chair. "8 This brings us to specific consideration of Valery's sexual imagery: it is characterized by a powerful carnality, intense pleasure in the sensual delights of the female body. Perhaps only in Eluard do we find a comparable sensuality in all of French poetry. The woman, always young and appealing, is invariably nude.
4	There are no en- hancing clothes, perfumes, or jewelry.9 Valery ex- plores every imaginable aspect of the flesh, its plasticity and beauty, pictorial and sculptural qualities, its color, consistency, fluidity, its taste, odor, softness, warmth, and sensitivity. And if this imagery is so powerful, it is because this flesh is so alive: it trembles, moves, ripens, is felt from within, and responds to caresses and to deep inner forces, those of the "profondes forets" and the "chair profonde." Sexual passion appears in imagery of closed eyes, altered voices, and breath- ing, and the act itself is frequently, as in Mallarme, a devouring or a drinking or even a breathing in. Valery gains strength by a single-minded focus on the physical aspects of love, and also by an elabo- rate, leisurely development of sexual imagery in splendid combinations of sounds, rhythms, and powerfully suggestive language. Six alexandrines are needed to evoke the force and mystery of a caress when the lovers meet in "Fragments du Narcisse." Here and elsewhere, an accumulation of synonyms or subtly related words builds up in- tensity: dur, ceindre, vaincre, main puissante, forte, regne. This is Valery's most important technique for communicating overwhelming sexual feelings. In the famous sunset passage from the first section of "Fragments du Narcisse," sexual exhaustion is evoked in words not only related by sense but also 942 Sexual Imagery in La Jeune Parque and Charmes through repetition of similar sounds: comblhe, accablJee, and then s'e'tendre, se fondre, perdre sa vendange, s'e'teindre en un songe. Still, Valery establishes certain limits to "real- ism" because of his idea of poetry. At no time does he allow the communication of sexual feelings to become more important than the poetry itself. However powerful his sexual imagery may be, it never goes beyond a point where imagery shifts from the realm of poetic splendor to sexual provo- cation.
5	There are no passages in Valery compara- ble to the "jambes en l'air, comme une femme lubrique," of Baudelaire's "Une Charogne." Perhaps the greatest explicitness is reached when the Parque is torn between sexual desire and purity: " . . . Moi si pure, mes genoux / Pressen- tent les terreurs de genoux sans defense . . . " (11. 244-45). Her knees weaken and her breasts rise and swell. But it is significant that in manuscripts of the poem, Valery attributed these weakening knees to a "sister": "Moi si pure, mes genoux / Pressentent les genoux d'une sceur sans defense," while her swelling breasts were once linked more with the theme of nursing children than in the final poem. '0 Only gradually did Valery approach more express sexual images. Valery also refused to par- ticularize his lovers, to individualize them. The Parque is a lovely young virgin, but we do not know the color of her eyes and hair. The lovers in "Fragments du Narcisse" are never precisely de- scribed; they are only "l'amant" and "la blanche amante." General realism as well as sexual realism can intensify provocation and endanger poetry. Valery's avoidance of sexual precision is part of a general flight from realism in order to approach the limit of "poesie pure." And because of this same poetic ideal, Valery never allows the reader to identify the women in his poems. When we read Valery's "La Fausse Morte," or "Les Pas," or "La Dormeuse," we do not know the identity of the women involved, and because there is no move- ment toward excessive sexual precision, or toward individualization or anecdote, it never even occurs to a reader to speculate on who these women are. This is one measure of success of Valery's poe'sie pure. It would be wrong, however, to think that only considerations of poe'sie pure govern the choice of sexual images in Valery's poetry.
6	We have already noted the theme of entrapment and the refusal of languor. Powerful negative attitudes exert their in- fluence on the sexual passages of La Jeune Parquie and Charmes. At the time these poems were written, Valery was unsparing in his attacks on love; he was wary of the threatening power of sexuality, and he extended his criticism of women to the point where it must be called misogyny: "La femme, sans exceptions, est un etre inculte,-et meme incultivable" (Cahiers, vi, 656). If, in a strange episode which took place in 1892, he al- ready found love to be a bog of emotion threaten - ing intellectual clarity, even sexual acts untainted by love appeared suspect. Without ceasing to be powerfully attracted by the flesh, Valery lucidly considered the sexual act a primitive biological function reducing the genius to the same level as the fool, and worse, destroying the independence of the intellect. This explains why we find explicit attacks on sexual acts even in the early poems. It also explains the language of the later poetry. In "La Fausse Morte," the sexual act is a "death," and even more significant, the woman takes the initiative and "attacks" the male. The manuscripts of "Interieur" and "La Dormeuse" offer clues which disappear in the finished poems, such words as "risque," "peril," "perte," "facile malheur," and "poison" to describe the woman, while in a manuscript of "Les Pas" she is a distraction troubling the thinker." Many of these overt atti- tudes are dropped in the poems, but in the defini- tive version of "La Dormeuse," such words as "ennemie" and "redoutable" still survive, while the ardent sexual union of "Fragments du Nar- cisse" obscures the vision of the lovers with the blood of passion. They lie to each other, struggle, form "un monstre qui se meurt," and the happy sexual union is immediately followed by hatred, cruelties, and separation.
7	There is no celebration of the woman in Charmes, or rather the celebration we do find is either of a very limited or very excessive nature. "La Fausse Morte" is probably the most significant example, since it recounts a sexual act, but the praise of the woman is moderate: "tombeau charmant" and "grace fatiguee." "La Dormeuse" appears to be a more important adoration, since here the poet is only a spectator, and Valery has permitted himself a less reserved and more con- crete realization of the mistress. The tercets are heavy with sensuality and praise for the beauty of her body. The poet addresses her familiarly and with affection. But there is nothing in these tercets Charles Whiting 943 to tell us how profoundly this spectacle trans- forms the poet, how much this woman means to him. She is certainly no "feu qui couve mille en- fants perdus d'espoir. "'"2 The poet is doing nothing more here than relishing fruit-like sensual flesh and esthetic beauty. When we turn to "Les Pas," it too appears at first glance a convincing example of celebration. A woman approaches the bed of the poet to bestow a consoling kiss and he in turn cries: "Dieux! . . . tous les dons que je devine / Viennent 'a moi sur ces pieds nus!" This is without question a tender poem, exceptionally a poem of tender rather than physical love,'3 but what is most significant here for our purposes is that the phan- tom coming toward the poet is exalted to a point where her quality of real woman totally evaporates and she becomes some kind of divinity. She is "personne pure," "ombre divine," and she ad- vances "saintement." Nothing happens to destroy this impression as she hovers above the bed of the reclining thinker, nor is there much suggestion of anything that will happen. The poem ends with a plea to the woman to wait while the poet savors the moment, and with a shift from the more intimate form of address to the respectful "vous."
8	Thus we can see in "Les Pas" the non-union characteristic of those poems where women are present with the poet. An even more striking example is "La Fausse Morte," where sexual union does occur but no genuine union exists between the lovers. Instead, the woman has given herself to a grateful lover before the poem begins and the first stanza evokes their "death." In the second stanza when the woman comes back to life it is to "at- tack" the lover and plunge him into a new death with actions which suggest violence far more than union. Finally, "La Dormeuse" and "Interieur" are the most obvious examples of non-contact. In "La Dormeuse," the poet remains a spectator throughout the poem while his mistress sleeps, and he is incapable even of divining the secrets of her dreams. "Interieur" reduces the woman to a role of discreet servant who makes the bed and changes the water of the poet's flowers. The poet seems aware of her sensual possibilities, but his medita- tion is not disturbed. This is the only poem in Charmes where the interior of a room is created, but the image of the room does not have the same importance for Valery as for Mallarme and Baudelaire. It is no intimate alcove of love. A pas- sage in Melange is also titled "Interieur," evoca- tive of a shelter against the elements where Valery has the freedom to think ((Euvres, i, 308). The woman and the room in the poem of Charmes are on the same level: creature comforts for the thinker. And so the woman in Charmes is reduced to her function of giving something to the poet: consolation, sexual pleasure, a calm interior, sen- sual delights, esthetic emotion. It is significant that Valery likes to use the words "abandon" and "dons" to describe the woman, and not merely for their charming sounds. And it is equally significant that his favorite body image is the breast, and not the woman's eyes, or her lips, or her hands, all of which imply a union.
9	Only in "Fragments du Narcisse" do we find imagery of hands, arms, and mouth, and this because Narcissus seeks union with his image: Qu'ils sont beaux, de mes bras les dons vastes et vains! Mes lentes mains, dans l'or adorable se lassent D'appeler ce captif que les feuilles enlacent; Mon c eur jette aux echos l'6clat des noms divins! . Mais que ta bouche est belle en ce muet blaspheme! (11. 117-21) A few lines later in the second part of the same poem there is again imagery of union as two lovers meet, but these images are immediately devalued: "Un couple aux pieds confus qui se mele, et se ment," "Ces grands corps chancelants, qui luttent bouche 'a bouche," "L'ame croit respirer l'ame toute prochaine" (my italics). Far from celebrating the woman or seeking union with her, Valery defends himself against her threats, and this by what is perhaps most op- posed to sensuality: predciosite. The slow rhythm, sensual incantation, and suggestions of the first stanza of "La Fausse Morte" shift brusquely in the second stanza to an alert rhythm, acute sounds, abstract language, and finally the pre- ciosite' of a triple paradox: the "dead" return to life, then choose a new "death," and this "death" is more precious than life. Witty intellectuality counters the heavy sensuality of the beginning. The same defenses are created in "La Dormeuse," but even more elaborately.
10	Here we find the familiar formulas of pre6ciosite', "brule," "en- nemie," "redoutable," the poet vanquished by the sleeping mistress, as well as a play on words at the very beginning of the poem, amie-dme-anima, and verses of mannered elegance: "O biche avec 944 Sexual Imagery in La Jeune Parque and Charmes langueur longue aupres d'une grappe." Not only does this quaintness, wit, and elegance defend the poet against the sensuality of the tercets, but it practically effaces any idea of a love affair. These revelations in Charmes cast a new light on La Jeune Parque. We have already commented on the limited role of the sexual dream and of sexual languor in Valery's great poem, as well as on the absence of any indulgence in eroticism. To these considerations, others should be added. The sub- ject of the poem is, as Duchesne-Guillemin has said, "la conscience de soi," but the subject is also the dramatic opposition between the mysteries and demands of the body and the ambitions of the in- tellect. To represent the body, Valery chose sexual- ity, thus testifying to the importance of the two attitudes we have explored: the great power of the flesh in Valery's poetry and the poet's view of sexuality as a threat. The Parque, at the end of the poem, loses her struggle for purity and in the final lines joyfully accepts existence. But Valery's taste for antithesis and his desire to end the poem with lines of sensual power balancing the passages evok- ing death should not obscure the significance of this ending for the poet himself. As far as Valery himself is concerned, it represents primarily a re- treat from the vast ambitions of Monsieur Teste and of Valery's youth. Characteristically, this compromise is expressed in an image of extremes, in a language of vitality.
11	The defeated Parque abandons purity and throws herself into an ac- ceptance of life just as a defeated Valery no longer hopes to realize the mirage of self-possession but still pursues ardently his exploration of the human mind and the "dressage de soi-meme." Signifi- cantly, the Parque herself alludes to the vivacity of ocean spray reaching even her "thoughts": ................................ l'onde Au cap tonne ........................... Et vient des hautes mers vomir la profondeur Sur ce roc, d'oiu jaillit jusque vers mes pensees Un eblouissement d'etincelles glacees. (11. 502-06) But the final passage also has the sense of an ac- ceptance of the body, for Valery as well as for the Parque. What is significant, however, is that there is not a simple plunge into sexuality. The Parque offers herself, with fervor, to the sun, but this passage is highly ambiguous. It is at the same time sexual and not sexual: a virgin offering herself and a virgin feeling intensely the beauty of the sun ris- ing on the sea. This fascinating play with ambiguity is characteristic of Valery. We have seen it already in the passage evoking the Parque's early years, lines which are curiously innocent yet sexual as the young virgin wanders voluptuously beneath the warm sunlight. It is an ambiguity again startlingly appatent in the sonnet "L'Abeille" which is a poem about a somnolent intellect seeking re- awakening, but communicated in powerful, sexual terms: "Pique du sein la gourde belle / Sur qui l'Amour meurt ou sommeille. "14 The same ambi- guity appears elsewhere, in "Fragments du Nar- cisse," in "La Ceinture," in "Poesie," and in "Can- tique des colonnes."
12	In all of these poems, some- thing which is not sexual appears in sexual images. The origin of all these ambiguities is clear: they represent the resolution of a threat. A powerful and dangerous force emerges in the poet's imagery, but in a form no longer ominous. In his private notebooks, Valery once made this commentary on the genius: "II est le gouvernement d'une folie, de cette folie latente, permanente qui est chez tous les hommes, qui perce dans les reves, que la ma- jorite se borne 'a reprimer . .. que la minorite inf6rieure, les vrais fous, subit sans pouvoir s'y opposer; et que la minorite superieure, seule, utilise, congoit, cultive" (Cahiers, VI, 513). Northwestern Universifty Evanston, Ill. Notes I It might seem that Valery's original intentions did not give the importance to sexuality which he recognized in the final version: "J'ai meme ete force, pour attendrir un peu le poeme, d'y introduire des morceaux non prevus et faits apres coup. Tout ce qui est sexuel est surajout6. Tel, le passage central sur le Printemps qui semble maintenant d'importance essentielle." Lettres a' quelques-uins (Paris: Gallimard, 1952), p. 124. The first state of the poem, how- ever, opened with the Serpent's bite, and the sexual forest scene (". . . ma voix / Que j'ignorais si rauque et d'amour si voilee.. .") occupied the central position and was immediately followed by the desire for death. Paul Val6ry, La Jeune Parque, ed. Octave Nadal (Paris: Le Club du Meilleur Livre, 1957), p. 222. 2 " 'Hrodiade,' 'L'Apres-Midi' et La Jeune Parque.
13	Celle- ci n'aurait pas exist6 sans ceux-l'a, bien entendu." Paul Charles Whiting 945 Valery, Cahiers (Paris: Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 1957-61), XXIV, 117. 3 (Euvres, ed. Jean Hytier (Paris: Bibliotheque de la Pleiade, 1957), i, 1747. 4L'Analyse de 1'esprit dans les cahiers de Valery (Paris: Corti, 1963), pp. 104-33. 6 Exaggerated notions of Valery's attitudes have led, e.g., to wrong interpretations of "Aurore," in which the poet, waking in the early morning, rejects ideas which have sketched themselves in his mind while he slept. He rejects them, however, not because they are involuntary produc- tions of the mind but simply because he prefers at that mo- ment to write poetry! 6 This dismissal of sexual passion from the present mo- ments of the Parque's monologue was so extreme that Valery later felt it necessary to reintroduce frankly sexual passages (the "springtime" passage and the following lines describing the Parque's reactions) into the poem, reestab- lishing a balance between sexual drives and the intellect. Such dosage is a common compositional technique in Valery and can be seen in the Zeno stanza of "Le Cimetiere marin" where a philosophical tone compensates, as Val6ry himself pointed out, the extreme emotions of the preceding stanzas.
14	7Entrapment is one of Valery's obsessions: "Tout homme enferme quelque chose de terriblement sombre, de pro- digieusement amer, de maudissant, d'ex6crant, de detes- tant la vie, le sentiment d'etre tombe dans une trappe, d'avoir cru et d'avoir et6 joue, d'etre voue 'a la rage im- puissante, 'a la d6mission totale, 'a une puissance barbare et inflexible, qui donne et qui retient, qui engage et qui abandonne, qui promet et trahit, et qui nous inflige par surcroit la honte de nous plaindre, de la traiter en in- telligence, en &re sensible et que l'on peut toucher." Val6ry, Cahiers, VIII, 207. See also, in Charmes, "Au Platane," "Ebauche d'un serpent" stanzas iii and iv, "Le Cimetiere marin" stanza xvii, and "Le Rameur." 8 Paul Valery, Propos me concernant, in Andre Berne- Joffroy, Pre'sence de Valery (Paris: Plon, 1944), p. 7. Typically, Mallarme makes use of exiguous images, "un doigt simple," "ses talons ingenus," to represent the female body in "L'Apres-Midi d'un faune." I The Parque does wear a dress, but it is significantly inconspicuous. 10 La Jeune Parque, pp. 264 and 253. 11 James R. Lawler, Lecture de Valery, une eitude de charmes (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1963), pp. 191,n. 1,90,79. 12 Paul Eluard, "Grain de sable de mon salut," in Derniers Poemes d'amour (Paris: Seghers, 1967), p. 92. 13 Valery himself referred to it as a "petit po'eme pure- ment sentimental."
15	Cahiers, xxviii, 427. 14 Some critics have given a simple sexual interpretation to the poem, but this is clearly an error. The bee is always an intellectual symbol in La Jeune Parque and Charmes. Furthermore, a poem about a virgin imploring a sexual awakening would have no significance in Valery's Charmes, an "egocentric" collection of poetry where all the poems revolve around Val6ry himself.
