0	MECHTHILD CRANSTON Rene Char 1923-28: The Young Poet's Struggle for Communication Je vais parler et je sais dire, mais quel est l'echo hostile qui m'interrompt? "Outrages," 1944-67, Le Chien de cwur (1969) IL N'Y A PAS d'humanisme poetique de la modernite' wrote Roland Barthes nearly twenty years ago. He qualified modern poetry as "un discours plein de terreur, c'est-'a-dire qu'il met l'homme en liaison non pas avec les autres hommes, mais avec les images les plus inhumaines de la Nature. "1 In Barthes's view, poets since Mal- larm6-and Rene Char foremost among them- have done away with the dialogue of classical literature and substituted for it the terror of indi- vidual words, words unconnected to each other and unrelated to the world around them. And yet, one of the most insistent themes recurring throughout Char's poetry is the problem of communication. The urgency of this problem may explain Char's ever-growing popularity with a certain group of young French intellectuals who have long since written off other con- temporary poets as irrelevant. Perhaps it is this theme also which has led Char critics-Berger, Mounin, Gascht, and Hubert Juin, to mention just a few2-to insist on the "fraternal" aspect of his poems. Char's obsession with the necessity for meaning- ful communication predates any appeal by Breton and his group to "retablir dans sa verite absolue le dialogue." In a sense, Char's definition of the dia- logue is even diametrically opposed to Breton's, for in his Manifeste du surrealisme (1924), the author defined the above appeal as follows: Chacun d&eux [i.e., of the two interlocutors] poursuit simplement son soliloque, sans chercher 'a en imposer le moins du monde 'a son voisin.
1	Les propos tenus n'ont pas, comme d'ordinaire, pour but le developpe- ment d-une these, aussi negligeable qu'on voudra, ils sont aussi desaffectes que possible. Quant 'a la reponse qu'ils appellent, elle est, en principe, totalement in- differente 'a I'amour-propre de celui qui a parle.3 For Rene Char, the struggle to get outside the soliloquy, to break down a wall within himself, to learn to listen and to speak, is a very personal, al- most physiological obsession apparent even in his earliest poetry. I shall not study here in detail Char's first published volume of verse, Les Cloches sur le ceur (1928), since such a study is al- ready available.4 Instead, I have chosen five texts from various volumes (only two from Les Cloches) roughly dating from 1923 to 1928, and all of them of particular importance to the poet. "Ce soir," the 1923 (or perhaps somewhat earlier) poem, was first published in April 1929 in the review Le Feu (Aix-en-Provence). Although by 1929 Char had come into contact with surrealism and had attuned some of his texts accordingly, he still permitted this poem of his lyce'e days to appear in print, which must mark a certain approval on his part (even though "Ce soir" never appears in any of Char's volumes of collected verse). "Jouvence," dated by the poet 1923-25, is first published as "Jouvence I" in Premieres alluvions (1946) and reprinted in the second edition of that collection (1950). The poem "Sillage" undergoes little change between its first appearance in Les Cloches sur le cteur and its reappearance as "Sillage noir" in the two editions of Premieres al- luvions. "Pret au depouillement," one of three prose poems in Les Cloches sur le ca?ur, is the only poem (out of eleven) to be transferred unchanged from Char's first volume of verse to Premieres al- luvions.
2	No exact dates of composition are known for the last two texts mentioned, though P.-A. Benoit gives 1922-26 for all the poems collected in 1928.5 "Sur le volet d'une fenetre," dated 1923-25, is a contemporary of "Jouvence" and a poem of which Char is particularly fond. He includes it in the Premieres alluvions of 1946, regroups it in Fureur et mystere (1948) under Les Loyaux Ad- versaires, and finally reprints it even in his 1964 anthology, Commune pre'sence. 1016 Mechthild Cranston 1017 "Ce soir," the poem of-at most-a sixteen- year-old, seems at first glance like an innocent variation on a troubadour theme: Le ch'evrefeuille en fleurs frissonne, languissant, Au vieux mur decrepi, tout boursoufl6 de pierre; Tes volets se sont clos ce soir 'a ma priere, Le chevrefeuille en fleurs se dresse eperdument L'ame de tes parfums erre en ce doux moment, ... Je devine ta voix en ce soir de misere, Mon cceur est cet enfant tout delirant de fi6vre, Et qui clame sa peur de mourir, grima9ant. Quelque chose a glisse sur ma joue, lentement, Un cypres quelque part apaise un cimetiere; Ton souvenir est la qui rode et qui espere Je suis lache ce soir! Je t'aimais tant! Et sur mon desespoir la nuit grave s'etend. The lover stands, at night, before the loved one's closed window, singing his languishing strains to the unseen lady.
3	The poem has Baudelairean echoes-ame, parfums, fleurs-although the gen- eral atmosphere also takes us back to medieval love lyrics.6 The slightly precious "quelque chose a glisse sur majoue" for "j'ai pleure" would not have been out of place in troubadour verse.7 There is a certain vagueness about the poem (quelque chose, que/que part) whose structure-if we take from it the medieval trappings of the chevrefeuille-hinges upon the implied dialogue of aje and a tu, the latter seen only in the form of its possessive adjectives, ton, tes. The third line, "Tes volets se sont clos ce soir 'a ma priere," is modu- lated by line 11: "Ton souvenir est la qui rode et qui espere." The two lines rhyme with each other, as well as with line 6: "Je devine ta voix en ce soir de misere," echoed, in turn, by line 12: "Je suis lache ce soir! Je t'aimais tant!" The verbs of the poem, nearly all in the present tense (which will remain the favorite tense of Rene Char), describe three opposing motions: se clore, roder, and errer seem to suggest the circle; se dresser and glisser indicate vertical movement, and the poem ends on the horizontal s'eYtend, which serves not only to personify la nuit grave, but also to underscore the general inadequacy of the poet ("je suis lache") who lets himself be covered by night and desespoir. The final idea suggested by the poem is one of cowardice and weakness. Note, by the way, that rdder is the only word to bring a purely animal notion into the otherwise mainly vegetable setting of the poem. And despite his "admirable bestiaire," to quote Jean Starobinski,8 Char will always remain first and foremost a poet of the vegetable world. As he looks back, nearly sixty years old, on his literary beginnings, Char recalls: "L'aubepine en fleurs fut mon premier alphabet" (L'Age cassant, 1966).
4	In "Ce soir" the desired dialogue between the poet's je and the unseen lady is hinted at struc- turally, but is not in fact heard, and the poet-or speaker of the poem-realizes that it is he who is at fault. If, instead of remaining at the bottom of the ladder and relegating his love to the imperfect (which, by the way, will be the dominant tense of Les Cloches sur le ca?ur), he had imitated the chevrefeuille, had climbed the wall and opened the window, communication would have been estab- lished. The poet would have heard clearly the voice which now he can only guess at: "Je devine ta voix." In a later-and much more virile-poem, the dialogue is opened. I do not think, however, that the implied tu of "Ce soir" and the actual tu of "Sillage" describe the same person. The first poem presents an actual confrontation; the second, an exploration of the poet's inner universe. In "Sil- lage," the poet enters into a dialogue with himself, condemning his own plaintes and ge'missements of an earlier period: Ce col enroule de tes plaintes Au recueil du couchant sonore N'est-il pas par son mutisme Le symbole froid de jadis Oiu a chaque etage de nue Tu retrouvais meles aux brousses Les gemissements que tu proferais Pour rassurer ton orgueil L'amour qui s'6tait assoupi Comme la mer sous une vague Garde un visage de momie Et parle une langue de sable. "Sillage" is, again, an evening poem. The regu- lar alexandrines of "Ce soir" have been replaced by not quite so regular octosyllables (which Char will favor down to his latest poems). Rhyme has given way to assonance. "Sillage" shares, connota- tively, much of the vocabulary of "Ce soir," al- though it is quite different in tone.
5	If the earlier poem could be called a Provengal canso, "Sillage" reminds us of the tenso in medieval verse. To return to the vocabulary: the wordfroid above echoes the earlier frissonne (both, furthermore, attributed to 1018 Rene Char 1923-28 vertical objects); plaintes and ge'missements are variations on the theme of languissant, priere, and de'sespoir;jadis modifies ton souvenir of "Ce soir"; the brousses replace the earlier chevrefeuille. "Chaque etage de nue" recalls the image of the flower climbing the wall. "Je t'aimais tant," the poet's cry of "Ce soir," is modulated in the more laconic "l'amour qui s'etait assoupi," which also recalls the final image of night spreading its wings over the poet's despair. "Je t'aimais" is further echoed by two imperfects: "tu retrouvais" and "tu prof6rais," the "tu" referring here to the poet himself. The scenery has changed slightly between "Ce soir" and "Sillage." From the courtyard of a Provengal mas, the poet has gone out into the open, and it is not a wall he faces now, but a mountain (that most virile of Char's symbols which will reappear in many of his mature poems).9 However, this is a mountain the poet will not climb. At its foot lies the sea, and it is here that the lover will seek the face that was hiding behind the closed shutters of "Ce soir." The face, at last, is seen, mirrored by the water, but it is a dead face: "L'amour qui s'etait as- soupi . . . / Garde un visage de momie." It speaks in the distant, shifting, fleeting voice of sand, mak- ing communication impossible.
6	Among Char's contributions to Ralentir travaux (March 1930), that joint effort by Breton, Char, and Eluard, there are these lines from "Isolee 'a ravir": Elle a jet6 un pont de soupirs Sur la mer inhabitable Elie a quitt6 ses habits de terre Mis ses habits de sable Elle parle une langue de liRge ... While a dialogue has not been established be- tween the poet and his love, a bridge has been thrown from earth to water. Nature has begun to live and to communicate with the poet. The sea has been humanized, has been made habitable. Though at this particular moment it is quiet and seemingly dead, we know that the water has been stirred. A "Sillage" can be seen on its surface. Nature speaks, but as yet, its language is not un- derstood by the poet. In the 1946 edition of the poem (in Premlires alluvions), three lines are added to it from Le Tombeau des secrets (1930), and the addition is significant: I1 n'est de similitude I1 n'est que solitude II n'est qu'aboiement et chien Man and the world have not become one. The poet, who tries to listen but does not understand ("ecoute mais n'entend pas," Lettera amorosa), remains fixed in his solitude. Only indistinct sounds are heard, like the barking of dogs. The last line seems to go back-perhaps uncon- sciously-to the "ton souvenir est la qui rode" of "Ce soir." While the earlier poem spoke only of the impossibility of communication, "Sillage" hints at a reason for the poet's failure: "les gemissements que tu prof6rais / Pour rassurer ton orgueil." Why did the young poet speak? Was it not to reassure his own vanity, to revel in the melodiousness of his own voice given over to sighs and lamentations? Was he, then, prepared to listen to someone else, or did he not speak from the amour-propre that Breton was to ban from poetic dialogue?
7	Perhaps it is his ldchete, as Char himself calls it, his lack of will that poems such as "Sillage" and "Pret au depouillement" try to combat. The latter, besides being one of Char's earliest prose poems, is the first to bear one of those magnificent Char titles that are in themselves a poem, "Pret au depouillement": Par ce temps de soleil veule, de douceur sans con- trariet6, il est inacceptable que la distance soit telle. Pourtant 'a mon corps sans limite tu ne saurais op- poser cette faible terre ou cet azur trop r6el. Ta voix est d6charn6e, intraduisible, et c'est tout juste en 1'6coutant si cette verge dont je me cingle le mollet ne devient pas le plus vil instrument de supplice. Char here transcends both the romantic strains of desespoir and his early Baudelaire-Rimbaud in- spired tones of general rebellion. Now his revolt turns against himself: "Il est inacceptable que la distance soit telle." This is perhaps the most powerful line in all of Char's early poetry. We have come a long way from "Ce soir." It is inad- missible that the distance from the ground to the window, from the sea to the sky, should be so great. The poet must awake to the oneness of na- ture, must himself build the bridge from earth to sky. "Pret au depouillement" is a poem of day, and all of Char's readers know that day will be the Mechthild Cranston 1019 privileged time of his most striking poems, from "Pret au depouillement" to Les Matinaux (1950) and beyond. While in "Ce soir" the poet spoke only of his ldchete, he now asserts his pride. In his "corps sans limite" he assumes cosmic propor- tions, and by sacrificing that limitless body, his pride, he will conquer the world.
8	It is not with an idealized nature or an ideological azur that the poet hopes to establish communication. He does not seek the Mallarmean ideal, but the real world of shadows and shades, where contraries can be abolished, where sky, earth, and water can com- mune. But before he can attune his ear to that Heraclitean harmony, the poet must wake up and stand up, whip himself into consciousness, cast away his pride, and learn to listen and to under- stand. "Et c'est tout juste en l'ecoutant si cette verge dont je me cingle le mollet ne devient pas le plus vil instrument de supplice." How different is the ending of this prose poem from that of the other texts examined. For the first time, we actually see the poet standing up (debout will become a key word in Char's vocabulary), fully awake and aware of his impotence. From "ce col enroule de tes plaintes" he goes to "cette verge dont je me cingle le mollet." From desespoir he passes to action, from plaintes to self-inflicted supplice. Chevre- feuille-brousses-verge, the (de-)gradation is evi- dent. "Je suis lache" becomes "je me cingle le mollet." The erotic overtones are obvious. (Per- haps one could even say that the "col enroule" and the "mollet cingle" are first hints at the serpent which will be the most important animal in Char's bestiary.) I think we have in "Pret au depouillement" a double attempt at dialogue, that of the poet with the universe, and the poet's dialogue with himself.
9	Both attempts are unsuccessful, and the poet rebels against his own faiblesse, his inability to translate ("ta voix est ... intraduisible") the distance from earth,to sky, even on a day like this, when the im- pressionistic half-light of early morning would seem to favor the abolition of contraries, when communication between sky and sea, earth and water should be as self-evident in his verse as in an Elstir painting. The poem ends in a failure, but in the poet's awareness of that failure lies the first promise of ultimate success. The cosmic communication sought by the poet is first hinted at in a text which also dates from Char's literary beginnings. I do not know whether "Jouvence" is, in fact, Char's "praise of those poets who endeavor to infuse a new spirit in poet- ry, one which will give man a new understanding of his existence. "'0 The poem does recall the figure of Orlando separated from his raison and the pop- ular image of the poet lost "dans les nuages" or "dans la lune": Ceux qui partent aux nuages Se separent de leur raison La mer ouverte 'a l'eil unique Est leur taciturne horizon In an early prose text, Char also speaks-prais- ingly-of the traditional notion of poetic folly: "Toute poesie doit naitre libre et un peu folle," he writes in 1924.1" The poem of 1923-25 does not, however, opt in favor of those who "partent aux nuages." It does represent a movement away from "cette faible terre" and "cet azur trop reel." But the mere substitution of one horizon for another, the sky for the sea, does not in itself bring about any significant change. The sea will remain as taciturn as the mountain wrapped in its mutisme. It is the symbol of the cloud (first introduced in "Sillage") which will eventually bring together earth and sky and thus establish a dialogue.
10	"Dans nos interminables songeries devant le ciel," writes Gaston Bachelard, "des que les nuages descendent sur la table de pierre, dans le creux de nos mains, il semble que tous les objets s'arrondissent un peu, qu'une penombre blanche habille les cristaux. Le monde a notre dimension, le ciel est sur terre, notre main touche le ciel. "'2 Symbol of the amor- phous, the cloud is nevertheless a dynamic image as it suggests two opposing movements: the verti- cal movement of ascension, with its concomitants of insecurity and risk, and its opposite: the move- ment (or stillness) of the circle, connoting security, stability, and warmth. It is interesting to see how two later poems of Rene Char illustrate this double aspect of the cloud. In Les Loyaux Adversaires (Fureur et mystere, 1948) figures "Cette fumee qui nous portait," a prose poem that will lend its title to the opening section of Commune pre'sence. In it, the poet combines the image of the cloud with that of the mountain to reinforce the theme of ascen- sion, announced by the title: Cette fumee qui nous portait etait sceur du baton qui 1020 Rene Char 1923-28 derange la pierre et du nuage qui ouvre le ciel. Elle n'avait pas mepris de nous, nous prenait tels que nous etions, minces ruisseaux nourris de desarroi et d'esper- ance, avec un verrou aux machoires et une montagne dans le regard. This text combines again the notions of errer (in de'sarroi) and espe'rer (espe'rance) as we found them in "Ce soir." The mature poet repeats the itinerary traveled in his youth. From "cette faible terre" he seeks to rise like smoke to horizons beyond "cet azur trop reel," horizons that stand out like "une montagne dans le regard."
11	If his journey is to be successful, the lock that holds his jaws must be broken, and the poet must find "la parole qui delivre," the word that will lift him from his earth- bound de'sarroi to espe'rance. The poem above suggests both horizontal and vertical movement (verrou, montagne), but the tension felt in "Ce soir" is resolved here by the dominant image of the circle, suggested by pierre, nuage, and ciel. Bachelard in his prose ("des que les nuages descendent sur la table de pierre . . . ") has once again uncovered one of the intricate associative processes of the poetic imagination: "du baton qui derange la pierre et du nuage qui ouvre le ciel." The last image takes us back to the "mer ouverte 'a l'ceil unique" and perhaps to the title, "Sillage," if we think of the wake left by the cloud as it "opens" the sky. In "Sur les hauteurs," a text from Les Matinaux (1950), Char likens his own destiny to that of the cloud and speaks of the precarious nature of their mutual existence: Attends encore que je vienne Fendre le froid qui nous retient. Nuage, en ta vie aussi menacee que la mienne. Again there is the suggestion of a breaking down or opening up (fendre) of a hostile element, le froid, which reminds us of le symbole froid, the mountain of "Sillage" standing proud in its mutisme. Instinctively the poet feels, even in his early verse, that the cloud will be his ally in his quest for meaningful communication with the world around him. In the poem "Jouvence," the dual symbolism of the cloud is already suggested. The verbs of lines one and two-se se'parer, partir-introduce the theme of risk, while the nouns of lines three and four-mer, ccil, horizon-suggest roundness and security. Partir and se se'parer also modify the theme of absence, introduced in "Ce soir" by words such as deviner and souvenir.
12	But something has happened between "Ce soir" and "Jouvence." The title of the latter by itself stands in contrast to "le vieux mur decrepi" of the earlier poem. In "Jouvence," the volets clos of "Ce soir" have been opened. (I have spoken elsewhere of the equation volet [fene'tre]-mer, calling the sea the "fenetre naturalisee. ")13 Although no voice is heard in "Jouvence" and the horizon remains still, the sea-once likened to a visage de momie-has begun to live. It has opened its ccil unique. In the 1946 and 1950 editions of Premieres al- luvions, a second stanza, undated, is added to "Jouvence": Ceux qui mentent aux nuages Sont menagers de leur raison La mer ouverte 'a l'ceil multiple Est leur famelique horizon. The new quatrain illustrates the poet's neutrality vis-'a-vis his subject. Those who keep their reason but lie to the clouds (by denying them, like Mal- larme?) are really no better off than "ceux qui partent aux nuages," the romantics, the dreamers. No judgments are spoken, no sides taken between "Jouvence" I and ii. The structure of the poem supports the poet's neutral position. "Ce soir" spoke in the naive and touching form of a con- fession, through the romantic je. "Jouvence" achieves distancing by its use of the third person, and, in particular, through the demonstrative pro- noun construction (celui que, ceux que) which will characterize much of the later Char: "Ceux qui, aux premieres heures de la nuit, ratent leur lit," writes the poet in 1947 ("L'Extravagant"). In "La Patience" (1948), he speaks of "ceux qu'il faut at- tacher sur terre"; in "Les Transparents" (1950) appears "celui qui part."
13	The poem "Centon" (1950) mentions "ceux qui regardent souffrir le lion dans sa cage," and one of the most recent of Char's poems, in Le Chien de c6eur (1969), points to "ceux qui ont installe l'eternel compensateur." The speaker of "Jouvence" does not engage himself or his own responsibility. Again, the cloud symbol fits in well with the linguistic structure of the poem. "La reverie des nuages recoit un ca- ractere psychologique particulier," writes Gaston Mechthild Cranston 1021 Bachelard. "Elle est une reverie sans responsa- bilite. "914 And yet I do not think that the image of the cloud is, for Char, sufficient unto itself. It does not replace human contact for him as it seems to do for Baudelaire, who writes, in the Curiosite's esthetiques: "Chose curieuse, il ne m'arriva pas une seule fois, devant ces magies liquides et aeriennes, de me plaindre de l'absence de l'homme." Quite to the contrary, the cloud represents, in Char's poetic universe, the mediator between man and the world. It establishes communication not only between the various elements (horizon-mer), but also between these elements and man, and, finally, between the poet and another human be- ing: "L'infini attaque mais un nuage sauve" ("Sur une nuit sans ornement," La Bibliotheque est enfeu, 1957). A near contemporary of "Jouvence" is the quatrain titled "Sur le volet d'une fenetre," one of Char's most serenely beautiful poems: Visage, chaleur blanche, Sceur passante, sceur disant Suave perseverance, Visage, chaleur blanche. The shutters of "Ce soir" have been opened, and reflected in the window is seen a face with the warmth and reassurance of a sister's face, a sister who receives, furthermore, the rather uncommon attribute of disant.
14	Finally, the wall has been broken down (or climbed), communication has been established with someone other than the poet's alter ego. Like the child to whom he com- pared himself in "Ce soir," the poet first learned to see, then to listen, and, finally, to understand. The listless murmurs of sand and sea, the unintel- ligible barking of dogs have given way to the voice of a "sceur disant." In the "visage, chaleur blanche" I cannot help but see again the image of the cloud. The quatrain has, moreover, all the lightness, the swiftness of air, the whiteness and the warmth of a cloud. "Le nuage, mouvement blanc. . . Tous les objets s'arrondissent un peu, . . . une penombre blanche habille les cristaux," wrote Bachelard. Char him- self associates face and cloud in a 1964 addition to his longest and most intense love poem, Lettera amorosa, in which he says: "Je ne confonds pas la solitude avec la lyre du desert. Le nuage cette nuit qui cerne ton oreille n'est pas de neige endormante, mais d'embruns enleves au printemps." "Ce soir" seemed to lack direction; vertical and horizontal as well as circular movement was indi- cated. "Sur le volet d'une fenetre," on the other hand, seems to glide in the air, a perfect circle. No movement is indicated. There is no tension of tenses. There are no verbs, only a present parti- ciple, but this one all-important: disant. Now the face hidden from the poet of "Ce soir" is not only seen, but also heard. The poet has learned to hear, and the poem is born. "La beaute nait du dia- logue, de la rupture du silence et du regain de ce silence" writes Rene Char in Le Bulletin des Baux (1947).
15	A poem of Les Matinaux (1950), which again carries the word jouvence in its title, retraces Char's poetic itinerary from soliloquy to dia- logue, from solitude to communication: Jouvence des Nevons Dans 1'enceinte du parc, le grillon ne se tait que pour s'etablir davantage. Dans le parc des Nevons Ceinturd de prairies, Un ruisseau sans talus, Un enfant sans ami Nuancent leur tristesse Et vivent mieux ainsi. Dans le parc des Nevons Un rebelle s'est joint Au ruisseau, 'a l'enfant, A leur mirage enfin. Dans le parc des Nevons Mortel serait 1'e'te' Sans la voix d'un grillon Qui, par instant, se tait. In the beginning, the child and the river are alone, each seeking to express, like the poet of "Ce soir," his tristesse and despair. Against this soli- tude, this distance ("il est inacceptable que la distance soit telle . . . ") the child rebels, and he learns to see: "leur mirage enfin." Child and river become one. As they grow together, each of them assumes cosmic proportions, communicating, finally, with the whole world, via the cricket's voice. In the park of the Nevons are heard at last "les paroles amoureuses de la terre" ("Le Bois de 1022 Rene' Char 1923-28 1'Epte"), and in the loving communion of man and nature, man and man, death and despair are over- come. I do not think-as Blanchot and Beaufret seem to do-that the dialogue engaged in by Rene Char is one of reason versus poetry.
16	"5 Rather, Char en- gages all of himself, his poetry and his reason, "ceux qui partent aux nuages" and "ceux qui mentent aux nuages," in a quest for meaningful communication with an Umwelt which would otherwise remain hostile or absurd: "L'infini at- taque mais un nuage sauve." The dialogue is, for Char, a necessary prerequisite for life. It is only in his communication with things and beings around him that man can hope to conquer death. Merci, et la Mort s'etonne; Merci, la Mort n'insiste pas; Merci, c'est le jour qui s'en va; Merci simplement 'a un homme S'il tient en echec le glas. This is the way Rene Char ends one of his long- est and perhaps most touching series of dialogues, Fe'te des arbres et du chasseur (1948). Man has entered into liaison with other men, and with Na- ture humanized by the word. And the terror of which Barthes spoke has been taken from him. * * * Many of Char's mature poems, from "Le Visage nuptial" (1938) to Fete des arbres et du chasseur and beyond, will be in the form of a dialogue, actual or implied. What, then, makes him pub- lish, in 1969 (Le Chien de ccur), the anguished question quoted at the head of this article: "Je vais parler et je sais dire, mais quel est l'echo hostile qui m'interrompt?" To this question, which he follows with the dates 1944-67, Char himself knows the answer. It is the maquis which silenced and still threatens to interrupt the poet. It is the "Capitaine de Cereste" who killed what the poet of the Sorgue fought so long and so hard to revive. "Depuis lIa," says Rene Char, refer- ring to the massacres of the maquis and his part in them, "j'ai perdu le chant.
17	"16 University of North Carolina Asheville Notes 'Le Degre zero de l'e6criture (Paris: Seuil, 1953), p. 72. 2 Pierre Berger, Rene' Char (Paris: Seghers, 1951); Georges Mounin, La Communication poetique, precYdei de Avez-vous lu Char? ; Andre Gascht, Charme de Rene' Char (Bruxelles: Le Thyrse, 1957); Hubert Juin "La Poesie et la fraternite" Critique, 96 (mai 1955), 409-14. 3 Andre Breton, Manifestes du surre'alisme (Paris: Gallimard, 1963), p. 49. 4Virginia A. La Charite, The Poetics and the Poetry of Rene Char (Chapel Hill: Univ. of North Carolina Press, 1958). La Charite is also interested in the problem of com- munication in Char's poetry, though perhaps on a different level from that examined here. I Bibliographie des t-uvres de Rene Char de 1928 a 1963 (Paris: Le Demi Jour, 1964). 6 In any case, La Charite is mistaken in asserting that Georges Mounin "errs in dismissing" the poem as "un sonnet mallarmeen." What Mounin in fact said is: "Avec ce texte peut-etre unique, nous ne serions pas loin du probleme banal des premiers vers de tous les poetes, des sonnets savamment mallarmeens que Breton fignolait en 1918" (p. 205). "Ce soir" does indeed show resemblance to poems of Mallarme' Iyceen (Paris: Gallimard, 1954) and could be compared to "Reve antique" (p. 125), "Loeda" (pp. 152-55), and the opening of "Sa tombe est ferm6e! . . ." (p. 165). 7 Georges Mounin also raises the question of possible pr&cieux elements in Char's poetry (pp. 197-222).
18	8"Ren6 Char et la definition du poeme," Liberte, 10, Montreal (juillet-aout 1968), 25. 9I realize, of course, that the word col here also suggests the neck, and a collar, meanings which help to explain the word mutisme associated with col. The mountaintop in its cold and quiet solitude is not an infrequent image in Char's later poetry. 10 La Charite, p. 20. 11 A prose text first published by Georges Mounin in Les Temps Modernes, No. 137-38 (juillet-aouit 1957), pp. 277-78. 12 L'Air et les songes: Essai sur l'imagination du mouve- ment (Paris: Corti, 1943), p. 217. 13 Enfance, mon amour: La Re'verie vers l'enfance dans l'aruvre de Guillaume Apollinaire, Saint-John Perse et Rene Char (Paris: Debresse, 1970), the last two chapters on Char. 14 Bachelard, p. 212. The italics are Bachelard's. 15 Maurice Blanchot, La Bete de Lascaux (Paris: GLM, 1958), and Jean Beaufret, "L'Entretien sous le marronnier," L'Arc, No. 22 (ete 1963). 16 In a private interview, 1970.
